                                         CHAPTER

                                                  6




      DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL
        LOGIC GATES IN CMOS

                           In-depth discussion of logic families in CMOS—
                  static and dynamic, pass-transistor, non-ratioed and ratioed logic
                                                    n
                     Optimizing a logic gate for area, speed, energy, or robustness
                                                n
                     Low-power and high-performance circuit-design techniques




6.1   Introduction                                          6.3.3   Issues in Dynamic Design

6.2   Static CMOS Design                                    6.3.4   Cascading Dynamic Gates
      6.2.1   Complementary CMOS                      6.4   Perspectives
      6.2.2   Ratioed Logic                                 6.4.1   How to Choose a Logic Style?
      6.2.3   Pass-Transistor Logic                         6.4.2   Designing Logic for Reduced Supply
                                                                    Voltages
6.3   Dynamic CMOS Design
      6.3.1   Dynamic Logic: Basic Principles         6.5   Summary
      6.3.2   Speed and Power Dissipation of          6.6   To Probe Further
              Dynamic Logic




                                                                                                    229
230                            DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                        Chapter 6


6.1   Introduction

        The design considerations for a simple inverter circuit were presented in the previous
        chapter. Now, we will extend this discussion to address the synthesis of arbitrary digital
        gates such as NOR, NAND and XOR. The focus is on combinational logic (or non-regen-
        erative) circuits; this is, circuits that have the property that at any point in time, the output
        of the circuit is related to its current input signals by some Boolean expression (assuming
        that the transients through the logic gates have settled). No intentional connection between
        outputs and inputs is present.
               This is in contrast to another class of circuits, known as sequential or regenerative,
        for which the output is not only a function of the current input data, but also of previous
        values of the input signals (Figure 6.1). This is accomplished by connecting one or more
        outputs intentionally back to some inputs. Consequently, the circuit “remembers” past
        events and has a sense of history. A sequential circuit includes a combinational logic por-
        tion and a module that holds the state. Example circuits are registers, counters, oscillators,
        and memory. Sequential circuits are the topic of the next Chapter.


                          Combinational                       In                Combinational        Out
         In                  Logic                  Out                            Logic
                             Circuit                                               Circuit



                                                                                     State
                     (a) Combinational                                           (b) Sequential

                                 Figure 6.1 High level classification of logic circuits.

              There are numerous circuit styles to implement a given logic function. As with the
        inverter, the common design metrics by which a gate is evaluated are area, speed, energy
        and power. Depending on the application, the emphasis will be on different metrics. For
        instance, the switching speed of digital circuits is the primary metric in a high-perfor-
        mance processor, while it is energy dissipation in a battery operated circuit. In addition to
        these metrics, robustness to noise and reliability are also very important considerations.
        We will see that certain logic styles can significantly improve performance, but are more
        sensitive to noise. Recently, power dissipation has also become a very important require-
        ment and significant emphasis is placed on understanding the sources of power and
        approaches to deal with power.


6.2   Static CMOS Design

        The most widely used logic style is static complementary CMOS. The static CMOS style
        is really an extension of the static CMOS inverter to multiple inputs. In review, the pri-
        mary advantage of the CMOS structure is robustness (i.e, low sensitivity to noise), good
        performance, and low power consumption with no static power dissipation. Most of those
Section 6.2         Static CMOS Design                                                             231


         properties are carried over to large fan-in logic gates implemented using a similar circuit
         topology.
                The complementary CMOS circuit style falls under a broad class of logic circuits
         called static circuits in which at every point in time (except during the switching tran-
         sients), each gate output is connected to either VDD or Vss via a low-resistance path. Also,
         the outputs of the gates assume at all times the value of the Boolean function implemented
         by the circuit (ignoring, once again, the transient effects during switching periods). This is
         in contrast to the dynamic circuit class, which relies on temporary storage of signal values
         on the capacitance of high-impedance circuit nodes. The latter approach has the advantage
         that the resulting gate is simpler and faster. Its design and operation are however more
         involved and prone to failure due to an increased sensitivity to noise.
                In this section, we sequentially address the design of various static circuit flavors
         including complementary CMOS, ratioed logic (pseudo-NMOS and DCVSL), and pass-
         transistor logic. The issues of scaling to lower power supply voltages and threshold volt-
         ages will also be dealt with.


         6.2.1         Complementary CMOS

         Concept
         A static CMOS gate is a combination of two networks, called the pull-up network (PUN)
         and the pull-down network (PDN) (Figure 6.2). The figure shows a generic N input logic
         gate where all inputs are distributed to both the pull-up and pull-down networks. The func-
         tion of the PUN is to provide a connection between the output and VDD anytime the output
         of the logic gate is meant to be 1 (based on the inputs). Similarly, the function of the PDN
         is to connect the output to VSS when the output of the logic gate is meant to be 0. The PUN
         and PDN networks are constructed in a mutually exclusive fashion such that one and only
         one of the networks is conducting in steady state. In this way, once the transients have set-
         tled, a path always exists between VDD and the output F, realizing a high output (“one”),
         or, alternatively, between VSS and F for a low output (“zero”). This is equivalent to stating
         that the output node is always a low-impedance node in steady state.
                             VDD

              In1
              In2                        pull-up: make a connection from VDD to F when
                             PUN
                                         F(In1,In2, ... Inn) = 1
              InN

                                            F (In1,In2, ... Inn)
              In1
              In2
                                         pull-down: make a connection from VDD to Vss when
                             PDN         F(In1,In2, ... Inn) = 0
              InN

                             VSS
          Figure 6.2 Complementary logic gate as a combination of a PUN (pull-up network) and a
          PDN (pull-down network).
232                             DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                     Chapter 6


                  In constructing the PDN and PUN networks, the following observations should be
            kept in mind:
              • A transistor can be thought of as a switch controlled by its gate signal. An NMOS
                switch is on when the controlling signal is high and is off when the controlling signal
                is low. A PMOS transistor acts as an inverse switch that is on when the controlling
                signal is low and off when the controlling signal is high.
              • The PDN is constructed using NMOS devices, while PMOS transistors are used in
                the PUN. The primary reason for this choice is that NMOS transistors produce
                “strong zeros,” and PMOS devices generate “strong ones”. To illustrate this, con-
                sider the examples shown in Figure 6.3. In Figure 6.3a, the output capacitance is ini-
                tially charged to VDD. Two possible discharge scenarios are shown. An NMOS
                device pulls the output all the way down to GND, while a PMOS lowers the output
                no further than |VTp| — the PMOS turns off at that point, and stops contributing dis-
                charge current. NMOS transistors are hence the preferred devices in the PDN. Simi-
                larly, two alternative approaches to charging up a capacitor are shown in Figure
                6.3b, with the output initially at GND. A PMOS switch succeeds in charging the
                output all the way to VDD, while the NMOS device fails to raise the output above
                VDD-VTn. This explains why PMOS transistors are preferentially used in a PUN.
               Out    VDD→ 0                  Out     VDD→ |VTp|

      VDD                CL                            CL


        (a) pulling down a node using NMOS and PMOS switches        Figure 6.3 Simple examples
                                                                    illustrate why an NMOS should be
      VDD                                                           used as a pull-down, and a PMOS
                  0→ VDD- VTn                         0 → VDD       should be used as a pull-up device.
                                                Out
                Out
                         CL
                                                       CL
        (b) pulling down a node using NMOS and PMOS switches

              • A set of construction rules can be derived to construct logic functions (Figure 6.4).
                NMOS devices connected in series corresponds to an AND function. With all the
                inputs high, the series combination conducts and the value at one end of the chain is
                transferred to the other end. Similarly, NMOS transistors connected in parallel rep-
                resent an OR function. A conducting path exists between the output and input termi-
                nal if at least one of the inputs is high. Using similar arguments, construction rules
                for PMOS networks can be formulated. A series connection of PMOS conducts if
                both inputs are low, representing a NOR function (A.B = A+B), while PMOS transis-
                tors in parallel implement a NAND (A+B = A·B.
              • Using De Morgan’s theorems ((A + B) = A·B and A·B = A + B), it can be shown that
                the pull-up and pull-down networks of a complementary CMOS structure are dual
                networks. This means that a parallel connection of transistors in the pull-up network
                corresponds to a series connection of the corresponding devices in the pull-down
Section 6.2     Static CMOS Design                                                                           233



                              B         A
      Series Combination
                                                          A                           Parallel Combination
      Conducts if A · B                                                B
                                                                                      Conducts if A + B


                              (a) series                           (b) parallel

     Figure 6.4 NMOS logic rules — series devices implement an AND, and parallel devices
     implement an OR.
                network, and vice versa. Therefore, to construct a CMOS gate, one of the networks
                (e.g., PDN) is implemented using combinations of series and parallel devices. The
                other network (i.e., PUN) is obtained using duality principle by walking the hierar-
                chy, replacing series sub-nets with parallel sub-nets, and parallel sub-nets with
                series sub-nets. The complete CMOS gate is constructed by combining the PDN
                with the PUN.
              • The complementary gate is naturally inverting, implementing only functions such as
                NAND, NOR, and XNOR. The realization of a non-inverting Boolean function
                (such as AND OR, or XOR) in a single stage is not possible, and requires the addi-
                tion of an extra inverter stage.
              • The number of transistors required to implement an N-input logic gate is 2N.

         Example 6.1 Two-input NAND Gate
                Figure 6.5 shows a two-input NAND gate (F = A·B). The PDN network consists of two
                NMOS devices in series that conduct when both A and B are high. The PUN is the dual net-
                work, and consists of two parallel PMOS transistors. This means that F is 1 if A = 0 or B = 0,
                which is equivalent to F = A·B. The truth table for the simple two input NAND gate is given
                in Table 6.1. It can be verified that the output F is always connected to either VDD or GND,
                but never to both at the same time.
                                  VDD
                                                                  Table 6.1Truth Table for 2 input NAND
                    A         B
                                                                     A            B         F
                                        F                            0            0         1
                                                                     0            1         1
                          A
                                                                     1            0         1
                                                                     1            1         0
                          B


                           Figure 6.5 Two-input NAND gate in complementary static CMOS style.


         Example 6.2 Synthesis of complex CMOS Gate
                Using complementary CMOS logic, consider the synthesis of a complex CMOS gate whose
                function is F = D + A· (B +C). The first step in the synthesis of the logic gate is to derive the
                pull-down network as shown in Figure 6.6a by using the fact that NMOS devices in series
234                           DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                Chapter 6


              implements the AND function and parallel device implements the OR function. The next step
              is to use duality to derive the PUN in a hierarchical fashion. The PDN network is broken into
              smaller networks (i.e., subset of the PDN) called sub-nets that simplify the derivation of the
              PUN. In Figure 6.6b, the sub-nets (SN) for the pull-down network are identified At the top
              level, SN1 and SN2 are in parallel so in the dual network, they will be in series. Since SN1
              consists of a single transistor, it maps directly to the pull-up network. On the other hand, we
              need to recursively apply the duality rules to SN2. Inside SN2, we have SN3 and SN4 in
              series so in the PUN they will appear in parallel. Finally, inside SN3, the devices are in paral-
              lel so they appear in series in the PUN. The complete gate is shown in Figure 6.6c. The reader
              can verify that for every possible input combination, there always exists a path to either VDD
              or GND.
                                                                                               VDD       VDD

                                                                                                     C

                                       SN1         F                SN4             A
                                 F                                                                   B
                                                                       SN2
                      A                                A
         D                               D                                SN3
                  B       C                       B        C                               D

                                                                                                               F
                                                                                                     A
             (a) pull-down network           (b) Deriving the pull-up network
                                             hierarchically by identifying           D
                                             sub-nets                                          B         C

         Figure 6.6 Complex complementary CMOS gate.
                                                                                         (c) complete gate



      Static Properties of Complementary CMOS Gates
      Complementary CMOS gates inherit all the nice properties of the basic CMOS inverter.
      They exhibit rail to rail swing with VOH = VDD and VOL = GND. The circuits also have no
      static power dissipation, since the circuits are designed such that the pull-down and pull-
      up networks are mutually exclusive. The analysis of the DC voltage transfer characteris-
      tics and the noise margins is more complicated then for the inverter, as these parameters
      depend upon the data input patterns applied to gate.
             Consider the static two-input NAND gate shown in Figure 6.7. Three possible input
      combinations switch the output of the gate from high-to-low: (a) A = B = 0 → 1, (b) A= 1,
      B = 0 → 1, and (c) B= 1, A = 0 → 1. The resulting voltage transfer curves display signifi-
      cant differences. The large variation between case (a) and the others (b & c) is explained
      by the fact that in the former case both transistors in the pull-up network are on simulta-
      neously for A=B=0, representing a strong pull-up. In the latter cases, only one of the pull-
      up devices is on. The VTC is shifted to the left as a result of the weaker PUN.
             The difference between (b) and (c) results mainly from the state of the internal node
      int between the two NMOS devices. For the NMOS devices to turn on, both gate-to-
      source voltages must be above VTn, with VGS2 = VA - VDS1 and VGS1 = VB. The threshold
Section 6.2      Static CMOS Design                                                                            235


                                                                 3.0
                                    VDD

                       A            B
                               M3         M4                                                   A = B = 0→1
                                                                 2.0
                                           F




                                                       Vout, V
                                                                          A=1, B=0→1
                           A         M2
                                                                 1.0
                                          int
                                                                          B=1, A=0→1
                           B         M1

                                                                 0.00.0             1.0               2.0    3.0
                                                                                             Vin, V
          Figure 6.7 The VTC of a two-input NAND is data-dependent. NMOS devices are
          0.5µm/0.25µm while the PMOS devices are sized at 0.75µm/0.25µm.

         voltage of transistor M2 will be higher than transistor M1 due to the body effect. The
         threshold voltages of the two devices are given by:

                                     V Tn2 = V tn0 + γ ( (        2φ f + Vint ) –   2φ f )                   (6.1)
                                                       VTn1 = V tn0                                          (6.2)
                For case (b), M3 is turned off, and the gate voltage of M2 is set to VDD. To a first
         order, M2 may be considered as a resistor in series with M1. Since the drive on M2 is large,
         this resistance is small and has only a small effect on the voltage transfer characteristics.
         In case (c), transistor M1 acts as a resistor, causing body effect in M2. The overall impact
         is quite small as seen from the plot.

              Design Consideration


         The important point to take away from the above discussion is that the noise margins are
         input-pattern dependent. For the above example, a glitch on only one of the two inputs has a
         larger chance of creating a false transition at the output than when the glitch would occur on
         both inputs simultaneously. Therefore, the former condition has a lower low noise margin. A
         common practice when characterizing gates such as NAND and NOR is to connect all the
         inputs together. This unfortunately does not represent the worst-case static behavior. The data
         dependencies should be carefully modeled.




         Propagation Delay of Complementary CMOS Gates
         The computation of propagation delay proceeds in a fashion similar to the static inverter.
         For the purpose of delay analysis, each transistor is modeled as a resistor in series with an
         ideal switch. The value of the resistance is dependent on the power supply voltage and an
         equivalent large signal resistance, scaled by the ratio of device width over length, must be
236                              DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                     Chapter 6


      used. The logic is transformed into an equivalent RC network that includes the effect of
      internal node capacitances. Figure 6.8 shows the two-input NAND gate and its equivalent
      RC switch level model. Note that the internal node capacitance Cint —attributable to the
      source/drain regions and the gate overlap capacitance of M2/M1— is included. While com-
      plicating the analysis, the capacitance of the internal nodes can have quite an impact in
      some networks such as large fan-in gates. In a first pass, we ignore the effect of the inter-
      nal capacitance.
                                                 VDD
                      VDD
                                                 RP    RP
         A            B
                 M3         M4
                                     A            B
                                                        F
                             F              RN
                                                            CL
             A         M2                    A
                                                                        Figure 6.8 Equivalent RC
                                                                        model for a 2-input NAND gate.
                                            RN
                       M1                                        Cint
             B
                                            B


             (a) Two-input NAND          (b) RC equivalent model
             A simple analysis of the model shows that—similar to the noise margins—the
      propagation delay depends upon the input patterns. Consider for instance the low-to-
      high transition. Three possible input scenarios can be identified for charging the output to
      VDD. If both inputs are driven low, the two PMOS devices are on. The delay in this case is
      0.69 × (Rp/2) × CL, since the two resistors are in parallel. This is not the worst-case low-to-
      high transition, which occurs when only one device turns on, and is given by 0.69 × Rp ×
      CL. For the pull-down path, the output is discharged only if both A and B are switched
      high, and the delay is given by 0.69 × (2RN) × CL to a first order. In other words, adding
      devices in series slows down the circuit, and devices must be made wider to avoid a per-
      formance penalty. When sizing the transistors in a gate with multiple fan-in’s, we should
      pick the combination of inputs that triggers the worst-case conditions.
             For example, for a NAND gate to have the same pull-down delay (tphl) as a mini-
      mum-sized inverter, the NMOS devices in the NAND stack must be made twice as wide
      so that the equivalent resistance the NAND pull-down is the same as the inverter. The
      PMOS devices can remain unchanged.
             This first-order analysis assumes that the extra capacitance introduced by widening
      the transistors can be ignored. This is not a good assumption in general, but allows for a
      reasonable first cut at device sizing.

      Example 6.3 Delay dependence on input patterns
              Consider the NAND gate of Figure 6.8a. Assume NMOS and PMOS devices of
              0.5µm/0.25µm and 0.75µm/0.25µm, respectively. This sizing should result in approximately
              equal worst-case rise and fall times (since the effective resistance of the pull-down is
              designed to be equal to the pull-up resistance).
Section 6.2                Static CMOS Design                                                                           237


                                  Figure 6.9 shows the simulated low-to-high delay for different input patterns. As
                           expected, the case where both inputs transition go low (A = B = 1→0) results in a smaller
                           delay, compared to the case where only one input is driven low. Notice that the worst-case
                           low-to-high delay depends upon which input (A or B) goes low. The reason for this involves
                           the internal node capacitance of the pull-down stack (i.e., the source of M2). For the case that
                           B = 1 and A transitions from 1→0, the pull-up PMOS device only has to charge up the output
                           node capacitance since M2 is turned off. On the other hand, for the case where A=1 and B tran-
                           sitions from 1→0, the pull-up PMOS device has to charge up the sum of the output and the
                           internal node capacitances, which slows down the transition.

                           3.0
                                             A = B = 1→0                                  Input Data         Delay
                                                                                            Pattern          (psec)
                           2.0
                                                                                         A = B= 0→1            69
              Voltage, V




                                                      A = 1, B = 1→0                    A = 1, B= 0→1          62
                           1.0
                                                  A = 1→0, B =1                         A= 0→1, B = 1          50
                                                                                          A=B=1→0              35
                           0.0
                                                                                         A=1, B = 1→0          76

                           -1.00                                                        A= 1→0, B = 1          57
                                       100        200       300      400
                                                 time, psec

                            Figure 6.9 Example showing the delay dependence on input patterns.

                                  The table in Figure 6.9 shows a compilation of various delays for this circuit. The first-
                           order transistor sizing indeed provides approximately equal rise and fall delays. An important
                           point to note is that the high-to-low propagation delay depends on the state of the internal
                           nodes. For example, when both inputs transition from 0→1, it is important to establish the
                           state of the internal node. The worst-case happens when the internal node is charged up to
                           VDD-VTn. The worst case can be ensured by pulsing the A input from 1 →0→1, while input B
                           only makes the 0→1. In this way, the internal node is initialized properly.
                                  The important point to take away from this example is that estimation of delay can be
                           fairly complex, and requires a careful consideration of internal node capacitances and data
                           patterns. Care must be taken to model the worst-case scenario in the simulations. A brute
                           force approach that applies all possible input patterns, may not always work as it is important
                           to consider the state of internal nodes.

               The CMOS implementation of a NOR gate (F = A + B) is shown in Figure 6.10. The
         output of this network is high, if and only if both inputs A and B are low. The worst-case
         pull-down transition happens when only one of the NMOS devices turns on (i.e., if either
         A or B is high). Assume that the goal is to size the NOR gate such that it has approxi-
         mately the same delay as an inverter with the following device sizes: NMOS
         0.5µm/0.25µm and PMOS 1.5µm/0.25µm. Since the pull-down path in the worst case is a
         single device, the NMOS devices (M1 and M2) can have the same device widths as the
         NMOS device in the inverter. For the output to be pulled high, both devices must be
         turned on. Since the resistances add, the devices must be made two times larger compared
         to the PMOS in the inverter (i.e., M3 and M4 must have a size of 3µm/0.25µm). Since
         PMOS devices have a lower mobility relative to NMOS devices, stacking devices in series
238                                DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                    Chapter 6


      must be avoided as much as possible. A NAND implementation is clearly preferred over a
      NOR implementation for implementing generic logic.
                    VDD                           VDD

                                              RP
           B         M4
                                              B
                                                                 F             Figure 6.10 Sizing of a NOR gate to
                     M3                       RP                               produce the same delay as an inverter with
           A                                                     Cint
                                                                               size of NMOS: 0.5µm/0.25µm and PMOS:
                                     F        A                                1.5µm/0.25µm.
               M1                                                    F
       A            B         M2
                                                  RN    RN           CL
                                          A        B




      Problem 6.1         Transistor Sizing in Complementary CMOS Gates
               Determine the transistor sizes of the individual transistors in Figure 6.6c such that it has
               approximately the same tplh and tphl as a inverter with the following sizes: NMOS:
               0.5µm/0.25µm and PMOS: 1.5µm/0.25µm.

             So far in the analysis of propagation delay, we have ignored the effect of internal
      node capacitances. This is often a reasonable assumption for a first-order analysis. How-
      ever, in more complex logic gates that have large fan-in, the internal node capacitances
      can become significant. Consider a 4-input NAND gate as shown in Figure 6.11, which
      shows the equivalent RC model of the gate, including the internal node capacitances. The
      internal capacitances consist of the junction capacitance of the transistors, as well as the
      gate-to-source and gate-to-drain capacitances. The latter are turned into capacitances to
      ground using the Miller equivalence. The delay analysis for such a circuit involves solving
      distributed RC networks, a problem we already encountered when analyzing the delay of
      interconnect networks. Consider the pull-down delay of the circuit. The output is dis-
      charged when all inputs are driven high. The proper initial conditions must be placed on
      the internal nodes (this is, the internal nodes must be charged to VDD-VTN) before the
      inputs are driven high.
                                   VDD                                        VDD

                                                                     R5       R6    R7   R8
       A        M5 B          M6 C        M7 D          M8
                                                             A       B         C    D
                                                                                              F
                                                                          R4
                          A         M4                                                        CL
                                                                          A
                                                                          R3
                          B         M3                                                   C3
                                                                          B
                                                                          R2
                          C          M2                                                  C2
                                                                          C
                                                                          R1
                          D          M1                                                  C1    Figure 6.11 Four input NAND
                                                                          D
                                                                                               gate and its RC model.
Section 6.2    Static CMOS Design                                                                                                239


              The propagation delay can be computed using the Elmore delay model and is
         approximated as:
              t pHL = 0.69 ( R 1 ⋅ C 1 + ( R 1 + R 2 ) ⋅ C 2 + ( R 1 + R 2 + R 3 ) ⋅ C 3 + ( R 1 + R 2 + R 3 + R 4 ) ⋅ C L )    (6.3)

               Notice that the resistance of M1 appears in all the terms, which makes this device
         especially important when attempting to minimize delay. Assuming that all NMOS
         devices have an equal size, Eq. (6.3) simplifies to
                                        t         = 0.69R N ( C + 2 ⋅ C + 3 ⋅ C + 4 ⋅ C L )                                     (6.4)
                                            pHL                1       2       3

         Example 6.4 A Four-Input Complementary CMOS NAND Gate
               In this example, the intrinsic propagation delay of the 4 input NAND gate (without any load-
               ing) is evaluated using hand analysis and simulation. Assume that all NMOS devices have a
               W/L of 0.5µm/0.25µm, and all PMOS devices have a device size of 0.375µm/0.25µm. The
               layout of a four-input NAND gate is shown in Figure 6.12. The devices are sized such that the
               worst case rise and fall time are approximately equal (to first order ignoring the internal node
               capacitances).
                       Using techniques similar to those employed for the CMOS inverter in Chapter 3, the
               capacitances values can be computed from the layout. Notice that in the pull-up path, the
               PMOS devices share the drain terminal in order to reduce the overall parasitic contribution to
               the output. Using our standard design rules, the area and perimeter for various devices can be
               easily computed as shown in Table 6.1
                       In this example, we will focus on the pull-down delay, and the capacitances will be
               computed for the high-to-low transition at the output. While the output makes a transition
               from VDD to 0, the internal nodes only transition from VDD-VTn to GND. We would need to
               linearize the internal junction capacitances for this voltage transition, but, to simplify the
               analysis, we will use the same Keff for the internal nodes as for the output node.


                                   VDD




                                                                                                                          Out




                                 GND

                                                                        A       B       C      D

                 Figure 6.12 Layout a four-input NAND gate in complementary CMOS.
240                   DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                     Chapter 6

      Table 6.1 Area and perimeter of transistors in 4 input NAND gate.

       Transistor     W (µm)          AS (µm2)            AD (µm2)            PS (µm)           PD(µm)

            1           0.5             0.3125              0.0625              1.75               0.25
            2           0.5             0.0625              0.0625              0.25               0.25
            3           0.5             0.0625              0.0625              0.25               0.25
            4           0.5             0.0625              0.3125              0.25               1.75
            5          0.375          0.296875             0.171875            1.875              0.875
            6          0.375          0.171875             0.171875            0.875              0.875
            7          0.375          0.171875             0.171875            0.875              0.875
            8          0.375          0.296875             0.171875            1.875              0.875

             It is assumed that the output connects to a single, minimum-size inverter. The effect of
      intra-cell routing, which is small, is ignored. The various contributions are summarized in
      Table 6.2. For the NMOS and PMOS junctions, we use Keq = 0.57, Keqsw = 0.61, and Keq
      = 0.79, Keqsw = 0.86, respectively. Notice that the gate-to-drain capacitance is multiplied
      by a factor of two for all internal nodes and the output node to account for the Miller
      effect (this ignores the fact that the internal nodes have a slightly smaller swing due to
      the threshold drop).

      Table 6.2 Computation of capacitances for high-to-low transition at the output. The table shows
      the intrinsic delay of the gate without extra loading. Any fan-out capacitance would simply be
      added to the CL term.

       Capacitor           Contributions (H→L)                              Value (fF) (H→L)

           C1          Cd1 + Cs2 + 2 * Cgd1 + 2 * Cgs2           (0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25 * 0.28) +
                                                                 (0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25* 0.28) +
                                                                2 * (0.31 * 0.5) + 2 * (0.31 * 0.5) = 0.85fF
           C2          Cd2 + Cs3 + 2 * Cgd2 + 2 * Cgs3           (0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25 * 0.28) +
                                                                 (0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25* 0.28) +
                                                                2 * (0.31 * 0.5) + 2 * (0.31 * 0.5) = 0.85fF
           C3          Cd3 + Cs4 + 2 * Cgd3 + 2 * Cgs4           (0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25 * 0.28) +
                                                                 (0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25* 0.28) +
                                                                2 * (0.31 * 0.5) + 2 * (0.31 * 0.5) = 0.85fF
           CL       Cd4 + 2 * Cgd4 + Cd5 +Cd6 +Cd7 + Cd8 +     (0.57 * 0.3125 * 2 + 0.61 * 1.75 *0.28) +
                    2 * Cgd5+2 * Cgd6+ 2 * Cgd7+ 2 * Cgd8 2 * (0.31 * 0.5)+ 4 * (0.79 * 0.171875* 1.9+ 0.86
                         = Cd4 + 4 * Cd5 + 4 * 2 * Cgd6    * 0.875 * 0.22)+ 4 * 2 * (0.27 * 0.375) = 3.47fF


      Using Eq. (6.4), we can compute the propagation delay as:

         tpHL = 0.69  --------------- ( 0.85fF + 2 ⋅ 0.85fF + 3 ⋅ 0.85fF + 4 ⋅ 3.47 fF ) = 85 p s
                       13KΩ
                      2 

      The simulated delay for this particular transition was found to be 86 psec! The hand analysis
      gives a fairly accurate estimate given all assumptions and linearizations made. For example,
      we assume that the gate-source (or gate-drain) capacitance only consists of the overlap com-
      ponent. This is not entirely the case, as during the transition some other contributions come in
      place depending upon the operating region. Once again, the goal of hand analysis is not to
Section 6.2     Static CMOS Design                                                                             241


                 provide a totally accurate delay prediction, but rather to give intuition into what factors influ-
                 ence the delay and to aide in initial transistor sizing. Accurate timing analysis and transistor
                 optimization is usually done using SPICE. The simulated worst-case low-to-high delay time
                 for this gate was 106ps.

                While complementary CMOS is a very robust and simple approach for implement-
         ing logic gates, there are two major problems associated with using this style as the com-
         plexity of the gate (i.e., fan-in) increases. First, the number of transistors required to
         implement an N fan-in gate is 2N. This can result in significant implementation area. The
         second problem is that propagation delay of a complementary CMOS gate deteriorates
         rapidly as a function of the fan-in. The large number of transistors (2N) increases the over-
         all capacitance of the gate. For an N-input NAND gate, the output capacitance increases
         linearly with the fan-in since the number of PMOS devices connected to the output node
         increases linearly with the fan-in. Also, a series connection of transistors in either the PUN
         or PDN slows the gate as well, because the effective (dis)charging resistance is increased.
         For the same N-input NAND gate, the effective resistance of the PDN path increases lin-
         early with the fan-in. Since the output capacitance increase linearly and the pull-down
         resistance increases linearly, the high-to-low delay can increase in a quadratic fashion.
                The fan-out has a large impact on the delay of complementary CMOS logic as well.
         Each input to a CMOS gate connects to both an NMOS and a PMOS device, and presents
         a load to the driving gate equal to the sum of the gate capacitances.
                The above observations are summarized by the following formula, which approxi-
         mates the influence of fan-in and fan-out on the propagation delay of the complementary
         CMOS gate

                                           t p = a 1 FI + a 2 FI 2 + a 3 FO                                  (6.5)
         where FI and FO are the fan-in and fan-out of the gate, respectively, and a1, a2 and a3 are
         weighting factors that are a function of the technology.
                At first glance, it would appear that the increase in resistance for larger fan-in can be
         solved by making the devices in the transistor chain wider. Unfortunately, this does not
         improve the performance as much as expected, since widening a device also increases its
         gate and diffusion capacitances, and has an adverse affect on the gate performance. For
         the N-input NAND gate, the low-to-high delay only increases linearly since the pull-up
         resistance remains unchanged and only the capacitance increases linearly.
                Figure 6.13 show the propagation delay for both transitions as a function of fan-in
         assuming a fixed fan-out (NMOS: 0.5µm and PMOS: 1.5µm). As predicted above, the
         tpLH increases linearly due to the linearly-increasing value of the output capacitance. The
         simultaneous increase in the pull-down resistance and the load capacitance results in an
         approximately quadratic relationship for tpHL. Gates with a fan-in greater than or equal to 4
         become excessively slow and must be avoided.

              Design Techniques for Large Fan-in

         Several approaches may be used to reduce delays in large fan-in circuits.
242                                   DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                               Chapter 6


                   1250


                   1000                                              tpHL
      tp (psec)




                    750


                    500
                                                                                     Figure 6.13 Propagation delay of
                                                                       tpLH          CMOS NAND gate as a function of
                    250                                                              fan-in. A fan-out of one inverter is
                                                                                     assumed, and all pull-down
                        02                                                           transistors are minimal size.
                                  4    6         8    10      12     14       16
                                                 Fan-in

                  1. Transistor Sizing

             The most obvious solution is to increase the overall transistor size. This lowers the resis-
      tance of devices in series and lowers the time constant. However, increasing the transistor size,
      results in larger parasitic capacitors, which do not only affect the propagation delay of the gate
      in question, but also present a larger load to the preceding gate. This technique should, there-
      fore, be used with caution. If the load capacitance is dominated by the intrinsic capacitance of
      the gate, widening the device only creates a “self-loading” effect, and the propagation delay is
      unaffected. A more comprehensive approach towards sizing transistors in complex CMOS
      gates is discussed in the next section.
                  2. Progressive Transistor Sizing

             An alternate approach to uniform sizing (in which each transistor is scaled up uni-
      formly), is to use progressive transistor sizing (Figure 6.14). Referring back to Eq. (6.3), we see
      that the resistance of M1 (R1) appears N times in the delay equation, the resistance of M2 (R2)
      appears N-1 times, etc. From the equation, it is clear that R1 should be made the smallest, R2 the
      next smallest, etc. Consequently, a progressive scaling of the transistors is beneficial: M1 > M2
      > M3 > MN. Basically, in this approach, the important resistance is reduced while reducing
      capacitance. For an excellent treatment on the optimal sizing of transistors in a complex net-
      work, we refer the interested reader to [Shoji88, pp. 131–143]. The reader should be aware of
                                           Out
                  InN        MN        CL



                                      C3     M1 > M 2 > M3 > M N
                  In3        M3


                  In2        M2       C2



                  In1        M1       C1
                                                 Figure 6.14 Progressive sizing of transistors in large transistor
                                                 chains copes with the extra load of internal capacitances.
Section 6.2     Static CMOS Design                                                                               243




                                            CL                                             CL
                         In3     M3                                     In1     M1


                         In2     M2         C2                                             C2
                                                                        In2     M2


                         In1     M1         C1                                             C3
                                                                        In3     M3

                                             (a)                                                (b)
              Figure 6.15 Influence of transistor ordering on delay. Signal In1 is the critical signal.

         one important pitfall of this approach. While progressive resizing of transistors is relatively
         easy in a schematic diagram, it is not as simple in a real layout. Very often, design-rule consid-
         erations force the designer to push the transistors apart, which causes the internal capacitance
         to grow. This may offset all the gains of the resizing!
              3. Input Re-Ordering

                Some signals in complex combinational logic blocks might be more critical than others.
         Not all inputs of a gate arrive at the same time (due, for instance, to the propagation delays of
         the preceding logical gates). An input signal to a gate is called critical if it is the last signal of
         all inputs to assume a stable value. The path through the logic which determines the ultimate
         speed of the structure is called the critical path.
                Putting the critical-path transistors closer to the output of the gate can result in a speed-
         up. This is demonstrated in Figure 6.15. Signal In1 is assumed to be a critical signal. Suppose
         further that In2 and In3 are high and that In1 undergoes a 0→1 transition. Assume also that CL
         is initially charged high. In case (a), no path to GND exists until M1 is turned on, which is
         unfortunately the last event to happen. The delay between the arrival of In1 and the output
         is therefore determined by the time it takes to discharge CL, C1 and C2. In the second case,
         C1 and C2 are already discharged when In 1 changes. Only CL still has to be discharged,
         resulting in a smaller delay.
              4. Logic Restructuring

               Manipulating the logic equations can reduce the fan-in requirements and hence reduce
         the gate delay, as illustrated in Figure 6.16. The quadratic dependency of the gate delay on fan-
         in makes the six-input NOR gate extremely slow. Partitioning the NOR-gate into two three-
         input gates results in a significant speed-up, which offsets by far the extra delay incurred by
         turning the inverter into a two-input NAND gate.




                                                                               Figure 6.16 Logic restructuring
                                                                               can reduce the gate fan-in.
244                           DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                  Chapter 6


      Transistor Sizing for Performance in Combinational Networks
      Earlier, we established that minimization of the propagation delay of a gate in isolation is
      a purely academic effort. The sizing of devices should happen in its proper context. In
      Chapter 5, we developed a methodology to do so for inverters. In Chapter 5 we found out
      that an optimal fanout for a chain of inverters driving a load CL is (CL/Cin)1/N, where N is
      the number of stages in the chain, and Cin the input capacitance of the first gate in the
      chain. If we have an opportunity to select the number of stages, we found out that we
      would like to keep the fanout per stage around 4. Can this result be extended to determine
      the size of any combinational path for minimal delay? By extending our previous
      approach to address complex logic networks, we will find out that this is indeed possible
      [Sutherland99].1
            To do so, we modify the basic delay equation of the inverter, introduced in Chapter
      5, and repeated here for the sake of clarity,

                                     t p = t p0  1 + ---------
                                                      C ext
                                                                = t p0 ( 1 + f ⁄ γ )                           (6.6)
                                                     γC g 
      to
                                               t p = t p0 ( p + gf ⁄ γ )                                       (6.7)
      with tp0 still representing the intrinsic delay of an inverter, and f the ratio between the
      external load and the input capacitance of the gate. In this context, f is often called the
      electrical effort. p represents the ratio of the intrinsic (or unloaded) delays of the complex
      gate and the simple inverter. The more involved structure of the multiple-input gate, com-
      bined with its series devices, increases its intrinsic delay. p is a function of gate topology
      as well as layout style. Table 6.3 enumerates the values of p for some standard gates,
      assuming simple layout styles, and ignoring second-order effects such as internal node
      capacitances.

      Table 6.3 Estimates of intrinsic delay factors of various logic types assuming simple layout styles, and
                                             a fixed PMOS/NMOS ratio.

                                        Gate type                    p

                                         Inverter                    1

                                     n-input NAND                    n

                                      n-input NOR                    n

                                    n-way multiplexer               2n

                                      XOR, NXOR                    n2n-1




             1
               The approach introduced in this section is commonly called logical effort, and was first introduced in
      [Sutherland99], which presents an extensive treatment of the topic. The treatment offered here represents only a
      glance-over of the overall approach.
Section 6.2        Static CMOS Design                                                                                   245


                   The factor g is called the logical effort, and represents the fact that, for a given load,
            complex gates have to work harder than an inverter to produce a similar response. In other
            words, the logical effort of a logic gate tells how much worse it is at producing output cur-
            rent than an inverter, given that each of its inputs may contain only the same input capaci-
            tance as the inverter. Equivalently, logical effort is how much more input capacitance a
            gate presents to deliver the same output current as an inverter. Logical effort is a useful
            parameter, because it depends only on circuit topology. The logical efforts of some com-
            mon logic gates are given in Table 6.4.

           Table 6.4 Logic efforts of common logic gates, assuming a PMOS/NMOS ratio of 2.

                                                                    Number of Inputs

                  Gate Type               1                2                    3                   n

                   Inverter               1

                    NAND                                  4/3                  5/3               (n+2)/3

                     NOR                                  5/3                  7/3               (2n+1)/3

                  Multiplexer                              2                    2                   2

                     XOR                                   4                   12


            Example 6.5 Logical effort of complex gates
                    Consider the gates shown in Figure 6.17. Assuming an PMOS/NMOS ratio of 2, the input
                    capacitance of a minimum-sized symmetrical inverter equals 3 times the gate capacitance of a
                    minimum-sized NMOS (called Cunit). We size the 2-input NAND and NOR such that their
                    equivalent resistances equal the resistance of the inverter (using the techniques described ear-
                    lier). This increases the input capacitance of the 2-input NOR to 4 Cunit, or 4/3 the capacitance
                    of the inverter.The input capacitance of the 2-input NOR is 5/3 that of the inverter. Equiva-
                    lently, for the same input capacitance, the NAND and NOR gate have 4/3 and 5/3 less driving
                    strength than the inverter. This affects the delay component that corresponds to the load,
                    increasing it by this same factor, called ‘logical effort.’ Hence, gNAND = 4/3, and gNOR = 5/3.
            VDD                     VDD                   VDD

    A                   A           B
              2                 2         2       B        4

                                          F
                    F                             A        4
                            A       2
                                                                     F
   A          1                                       1   B     1
                                              A
                            B       2
                                                                           Figure 6.17 Logical effort of 2-input NAND
                                                                           and NOR gates.
       Inverter               2-input NAND            2-input NOR
246                                       DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                         Chapter 6


                                                              The delay model of a logic gate, as
                                                              represented in Eq. (6.7), is a simple




                                                 2
                                               p=
                                                              linear relationship. Figure 6.18 shows




                                                ;
                                             /3
                                          =4
            5                                                 this relationship graphically: the delay



                                       :g
                                      D
                                               =1

                                  AN
                                             p                is plotted as a function of the fanout
       Normalized Delay




            4                             1;
                                 N
                               pu
                                  t  : g=                     (electrical effort) for an inverter and
                                  ter
                            in

                                er                            for a 2-input NAND gate. The slope of
                          2-


            3                 v                   Effort
                           In
                                                  Delay       the line is the logical effort of the gate;
            2                                                 its intercept is the intrinsic delay. The
                                                              graph shows that we can adjust the
            1
                                                  Intrinsic   delay by adjusting the effective fanout
                                                  Delay
                                                              (by transistor sizing) or by choosing a
                       1         2            3      4      5 logic gate with a different logical
                                       Fanout f               effort. Observe also that fanout and
       Figure 6.18 Delay as a function of fanout for an       logical effort contribute to the delay in
       inverter and a 2-input NAND.                           a similar way. We call the product of
                                                              the two h = fg the gate effort.
              The total delay of a path through a combinational logic block can now be expressed
      as
                                                             N                        N

                                                            ∑t                      ∑  p + -------γ 
                                                                                                      fj gj
                                                     tp =          p, j   = t p0                j                 (6.8)
                                                            j=1                     j=1

      We use a similar procedure as we did for the inverter chain in Chapter 5 to determine the
      minimum delay of the path. By finding N – 1 partial derivatives and setting theme to zero,
      we find that each stage should bear the same ‘effort’:
                                                       f1 g 1 = f2 g2 = … = f N g N                               (6.9)
      The fanouts along the path can be multiplied to get a path effective fanout, and so can the
      logical efforts.
                                                       F = f 1 f 2 …f N = C L ⁄ C g1
                                                                                                                (6.10)
                                                                 G = g 1 g 2 …g N
      The path effort can then be defined as the product of the two, or H = FG. From here on, the
      analysis proceeds along the same lines as the inverter chain. The gate effort that minimizes
      the path delay is found to equal

                                                            h = N FG = N H ,                                    (6.11)
      and the minimum delay through the path is
                                                                          N
                                                                                   N ( N H )
                                                       D = t p0 
                                                                     ∑       p j + ------------------ 
                                                                                            γ 
                                                                                                                (6.12)
                                                                      j=1
Section 6.2   Static CMOS Design                                                                             247


         Note that the overall intrinsic delay is a function of the types of logic gates in the path, and
         is not affected by the sizing.

         Example 6.6 Sizing combinational logic for minimum delay
               Consider the logic network of Figure 6.19, which may represent the critical path of a more
               complex logic block. The output of the network is loaded with a capacitance which is 5 times
               larger than the input capacitance of the first gate, which is a minimum-sized inverter. The
               effective fanout of the path hence equals F = CL/Cg1 = 5. Using the entries in Table 6.4, we
               find the path logical effort
                                                      5 5             25
                                              G = 1 × --- × --- × 1 = ------
                                                      3 3               9
               H = FG = 125/9, and the optimal stage effort h is 4 H = 1.93. Taking into account the gate
               types, we derive the fanout factors: f1 = 1.93; f2 = 1.93×(3/5) = 1.16; f3 = 1.16; f4=1.93. Notice
               that the inverters are assigned larger electrical efforts than the more complex gates because
               they are better at driving loads. From this, we can derive the sizes of the gates (with respect to
               their minimum-sized versions): a = f1/g2 = 1.16; b = f1f2/g3= 1.34; c = f1f2f3/g4=2.60.
                      These calculations do not have to be very precise. As discussed in the Chapter 5, sizing
               a gate too large or too small by a factor of 1.5 still result in circuits within 5% of minimum
               delay. Therefore, the “back of the envelope” hand calculations using this technique are quite
               effective.


              1                           b         c
                            a                                     5
                                                                          Figure 6.19 Critical path of
                                                                          combinational network.




         Power Consumption in CMOS Logic Gates
         The sources of power consumption in a complementary CMOS inverter were discussed in
         detail in Chapter 5. Many of these issues apply directly to complex CMOS gates. The
         power dissipation is a strong function of transistor sizing (which affects physical capaci-
         tance), input and output rise/fall times (which affects the short-circuit power), device
         thresholds and temperature (which affect leakage power), and switching activity. The
         dynamic power dissipation is given by α0→1 CL VDD2 f. Making a gate more complex
         mostly affects the switching activity α0→1, which has two components: a static component
         that is only a function of the topology of the logic network, and a dynamic one that results
         from the timing behavior of the circuit—the latter factor is also called glitching.
         Logic Function—The transition activity is a strong function of the logic function being
         implemented. For static CMOS gates with statistically independent inputs, the static
         transition probability is the probability p0 that the output will be in the zero state in one
         cycle, multiplied by the probability p1 that the output will be in the one state in the next
         cycle:
                                     α0 → 1 = p0 • p 1 = p0 • ( 1 – p 0 )                                (6.13)
248                       DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                                   Chapter 6


      Assuming that the inputs are independent and uniformly distributed, any N-input static
      gate has a transition probability that corresponds to

                                                              N0 •  2 – N 0
                                                                                 N
                                          N0 N1                                                  
                                α 0 → 1 = ------- • ------- = --------------------------------------                      (6.14)
                                             N         N                       2N
                                          2         2                       2
      where N0 is the number of zero entries and N1 is the number of one entries in the output
      column of the truth table of the function. To illustrate, consider a static 2-input NOR gate
      whose truth table is shown in Table 6.5. Assume that only one input transition is possible
      during a clock cycle, and that the inputs to the NOR gate have a uniform input distribution
      —this is, the four possible states for inputs A and B (00, 01, 10, 11) are equally likely.
                                       Table 6.5 Truth table of a 2 input NOR gate.

                                  A                                B                              Out

                                  0                                0                                 1

                                  0                                1                                 0

                                  1                                0                                 0

                                  1                                1                                 0

         From Table 6.5 and Eq. (6.14), the output transition probability of a 2-input static
      CMOS NOR gate can be derived:

                                      N 0 •  2 – N 0
                                                         N
                                                                               3 •  2 – 3
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                              3
                            α 0 → 1 = -------------------------------------- = ----------------------------- = ------     (6.15)
                                                       2N                                2•2                   16
                                                    2                                 2


      Problem 6.2 N input XOR gate
      Assuming the inputs to an N-input XOR gate are uncorrelated and uniformly distributed,
      derive the expression for the switching activity factor.


      Signal Statistics—The switching activity of a logic gate is a strong function of the input
      signal statistics. Using a uniform input distribution to compute activity is not a good one
      since the propagation through logic gates can significantly modify the signal statistics. For
      example, consider once again a 2-input static NOR gate, and let pa and pb be the
      probabilities that the inputs A and B are one. Assume further that the inputs are not
      correlated. The probability that the output node equals one is given by
                                                      p1 = (1-pa) (1-pb)                                                  (6.16)
      Therefore, the probability of a transition from 0 to 1 is
                          α0->1 = p0 p1 = (1-(1-pa) (1-pb)) (1-pa) (1-pb)                                                 (6.17)
Section 6.2   Static CMOS Design                                                                                  249




                                                                                  Figure 6.20 Transition activity of
                                                                                  a two-input NOR gate as a
                                                                                  function of the input probabilities
                                                                                  (pA,pB)

                Figure 6.20 shows the transition probability as a function of pa and pb. Observe how
         this graph degrades into the simple inverter case when one of the input probabilities is set
         to 0. From this plot, it is clear that understanding the signal statistics and their impact on
         switching events can be used to significantly impact the power dissipation.

         Problem 6.3   Power Dissipation of Basic Logic Gates
               Derive the 0 → 1 output transition probabilities for the basic logic gates (AND, OR, XOR).
               The results to be obtained are given in Table 6.6.

               Table 6.6    Output transition probabilities for static logic gates.

                                                                          α0→1
                           AND                                       (1 – pApB)pApB
                           OR                             (1 – pA)(1 – pB)[1 – (1 – pA)(1 – pB)]
                           XOR                          [1 – (pA + pB – 2pApB)](pA + pB – 2pApB)




         Inter-signal Correlations—The evaluation of the switching activity is further
         complicated by the fact that signals exhibit correlation in space and time. Even if the
         primary inputs to a logic network are uncorrelated, the signals become correlated or
         “colored”, as they propagate through the logic network. This is best illustrated with a
         simple example. Consider first the circuit shown in Figure 6.21a, and assume that the
         primary inputs, A and B, are uncorrelated and uniformly distributed. Node C has a 1 (0)
         probability of 1/2, and a 0->1 transition probability of 1/4. The probability that the node Z
         undergoes a power consuming transition is then determined using the AND-gate expres-
         sion of Table 6.6.

                           p0->1 = (1- pa pb) pa pb = (1-1/2 • 1/2) 1/2 • 1/2 = 3/16                          (6.18)
250                         DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                            Chapter 6



           A                 C                                                        C
                                                                A
                                               Z                                                      Z
           B
                                                                                      B

            (a) Logic circuit without                                    (b) Logic circuit with
                 reconvergent fanout                                         reconvergent fanout
       Figure 6.21 Example illustrating the effect of signal correlations.

             The computation of the probabilities is straightforward: signal and transition proba-
      bilities are evaluated in an ordered fashion, progressing from the input to the output node.
      This approach, however, has two major limitations: (1) it does not deal with circuits with
      feedback as found in sequential circuits; (2) it assumes that the signal probabilities at the
      input of each gate are independent. This is rarely the case in actual circuits, where recon-
      vergent fanout often causes inter-signal dependencies. For instance, the inputs to the AND
      gate in Figure 6.21b (C and B) are inter-dependent as both are a function of A. The
      approach to compute probabilities, presented previously, fails under these circumstances.
      Traversing from inputs to outputs yields a transition probability of 3/16 for node Z, similar
      to the previous analysis. This value for transition probability is clearly false, as logic trans-
      formations show that the network can be reduced to Z = C•B = A•A = 0, and no transition
      will ever take place.
             To get the precise results in the progressive analysis approach, its is essential to take
      signal inter-dependencies into account. This can be accomplished with the aid of condi-
      tional probabilities. For an AND gate, Z equals 1 if and only if B and C are equal to 1.
                                        pZ = p(Z=1) = p(B=1, C=1)                                    (6.19)
      where p(B=1,C=1) represents the probability that B and C are equal to 1 simultaneously. If
      B and C are independent, p(B=1,C=1) can be decomposed into p(B=1) • p(C=1), and this
      yields the expression for the AND-gate, derived earlier: pZ = p(B=1) • p(C=1) = pB pC. If a
      dependency between the two exists (as is the case in Figure 6.21b), a conditional probabil-
      ity has to be employed, such as
                                        pZ = p(C=1|B=1) • p(B=1)                                     (6.20)
             The first factor in Eq. (6.20) represents the probability that C=1 given that B=1. The
      extra condition is necessary as C is dependent upon B. Inspection of the network shows
      that this probability is equal to 0, since C and B are logical inversions of each other, result-
      ing in the signal probability for Z, pZ = 0.
             Deriving those expressions in a structured way for large networks with reconvergent
      fanout is complex, especially when the networks contain feedback loops. Computer sup-
      port is therefore essential. To be meaningful, the analysis program has to process a typical
      sequence of input signals, as the power dissipation is a strong function of statistics of those
      signals.
      Dynamic or Glitching Transitions—When analyzing the transition probabilities of
      complex, multistage logic networks in the preceding section, we ignored the fact that the
      gates have a non-zero propagation delay. In reality, the finite propagation delay from one
Section 6.2                  Static CMOS Design                                                                           251


                                      Out1                     Out2      Out3               Out4             Out5
                       1
                                                                                                                    ...



                           3.0
                                                     Out6


                                              Out2
                           2.0                              Out6
          Voltage, V




                                                        Out8


                           1.0                       Out7
                                       Out1
                                                                                Figure 6.22 Glitching in a chain of NAND
                                                            Out5
                                                                                gates.
                                       Out3
                           0.0
                                 0        200                      400    600
                                                     time, psec

         logic block to the next can cause spurious transitions, called glitches, critical races, or
         dynamic hazards, to occur: a node can exhibit multiple transitions in a single clock cycle
         before settling to the correct logic level.
                A typical example of the effect of glitching is shown in Figure 6.22, which displays
         the simulated response of a chain of NAND gates for all inputs going simultaneously from
         0 to 1. Initially, all the outputs are 1 since one of the inputs was 0. For this particular tran-
         sition, all the odd bits must transition to 0 while the even bits remain at the value of 1.
         However, due to the finite propagation delay, the higher order even outputs start to dis-
         charge and the voltage drops. When the correct input ripples through the network, the out-
         put goes high. The glitch on the even bits causes extra power dissipation beyond what is
         required to strictly implement the logic function. Although the glitches in this example are
         only partial (i.e., not from rail to rail), they contribute significantly to the power dissipa-
         tion. Long chains of gates often occur in important structures such as adders and multipli-
         ers and the glitching component can easily dominate the overall power consumption.

                       Design Techniques to Reduce Switching Activity

         The dynamic power of a logic gate can be reduced by minimizing the physical capacitance and
         the switching activity. The physical capacitance can be minimized in a number ways, including
         circuit style selection, transistor sizing, placement and routing, and architectural optimizations.
         The switching activity, on the other hand, can be minimized at all level of the design abstrac-
         tion, and is the focus of this section. Logic structures can be optimized to minimize both the
         fundamental transitions required to implement a given function, and the spurious transitions.

         1. Logic Restructuring
         Changing the topology of a logic network may reduce its power dissipation. Consider for
         instance two alternate implementations of F = A • B • C • D, as shown in Figure 6.23. Ignore
252                             DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                        Chapter 6



                 A                O1                                      A           O1
                                              O2                          B
                 B                                           F                                         F
                                  C
                                             D
                                                                          C
                                                                          D          O2
                          Chain structure                                     Tree structure
        Figure 6.23 Simple example to demonstrate the influence of circuit topology on activity.

      glitching and assume that all primary inputs (A,B,C,D) are uncorrelated and uniformly distrib-
      uted (i.e., p1 (a,b,c,d)= 0.5). Using the expressions from Table 6.6, the activity can be computed
      for the two topologies, as shown in Table 6.7. The results indicate that the chain implementa-
      tion will have an overall lower switching activity than the tree implementation for random
      inputs. However, as mentioned before, it is also important to consider the timing behavior to
      accurately make power trade-offs. In this example the tree topology will have lower (no)
      glitching activity since the signal paths are balanced to all the gates.

                  Table 6.7Probabilities for tree and chain topologies.

                                             O1                  O2                 F

                 p1 (chain)                  1/4                 1/8               1/16

              p0 = 1-p1 (chain)              3/4                 7/8               15/16

                p0->1 (chain)               3/16                 7/64             15/256

                  p1 (tree)                  1/4                 1/4               1/16

              p0 = 1-p1 (tree)               3/4                 3/4               15/16

                 p0->1 (tree)               3/16                 3/16             15/256


      2. Input ordering
      Consider the two static logic circuits of Figure 6.24. The probabilities of A, B and C being 1 are
      listed in the Figure. Since both circuits implement identical logic functionality, it is clear that
      the activity at the output node Z is equal in both cases. The difference is in the activity at the
      intermediate node. In the first circuit, this activity equals (1 − 0.5 × 0.2) (0.5 × 0.2) = 0.09. In
      the second case, the probability that a 0 → 1 transition occurs equals (1 – 0.2 × 0.1) (0.2 × 0.1)
      = 0.0196. This is substantially lower. From this we learn that it is beneficial to postpone the
      introduction of signals with a high transition rate (i.e., signals with a signal probability close to
      0.5). A simple reordering of the input signals is often sufficient to accomplish that goal.
      3. Time-multiplexing resources
      Time-multiplexing a single hardware resource—such as a logic unit or a bus—over a number
      functions is an often used technique to minimize the implementation area. Unfortunately, the
      minimum area solution does not always result in the lowest switching activity. For example,
      consider the transmission of two input bits (A and B) using either dedicated resources or a time-
      multiplexed approach, as shown in Figure 6.25. To first order—ignoring the multiplexer over-
Section 6.2    Static CMOS Design                                                                                253



                A                                       B
                                                                                                p(A = 1) = 0.5
                                                                                                p(B = 1) = 0.2
                B                                       C
                                                                                                p(C = 1) = 0.1
                                               Z                                        Z
                              C                                       A

          Figure 6.24 Reordering of inputs affects the circuit activity.

         head—, it would seem that the degree of time-multiplexing should not affect the switched
         capacitance, since the time-multiplexed solution has half the capacitance switched at twice the
         frequency (for a fixed throughput).
                If data being transmitted were random, it will make no difference which architecture is
         used. However if the data signals have some distinct properties (called temporal correlation),
         the power dissipation of the time-multiplexed solution can be significantly higher. Suppose, for
         instance, that A is always (or mostly) 1 and B is (mostly) 0. In the parallel solution, the
         switched capacitance is very low since there are very few transitions on the data bits. However,
         in the time-multiplexed solution, the bus toggles between 0 and 1. Care must be taken in digital
         systems to avoid time-multiplexing data streams with very distinct data characteristics.

     A
                                                       A        0
                     C                    t                                                      0         A
                                                                                            t

                                                       B         1
                                                                                    C            1         B
    B
                      C                   t




     (a) parallel data transmission                         (b) serial data transmission

  Figure 6.25 Parallel versus time-multiplexed data busses.

         4. Glitch Reduction by balancing signal paths
         The occurrence of glitching in a circuit is mainly due to a mismatch in the path lengths in the
         network. If all input signals of a gate change simultaneously, no glitching occurs. On the other
         hand, if input signals change at different times, a dynamic hazard might develop. Such a mis-
         match in signal timing is typically the result of different path lengths with respect to the pri-
         mary inputs of the network. This is illustrated in Figure 6.26. Assume that the XOR gate has a
         unit delay. The first network (a) suffers from glitching as a result of the wide disparity between
         the arrival times of the input signals for a gate. For example, for gate F3, one input settles at
         time 0, while the second one only arrives at time 2. Redesigning the network so that all arrival
         times are identical can dramatically reduce the number of superfluous transitions (network b).




         Summary
         The CMOS logic style described in the previous section is highly robust and scalable with
254                          DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                        Chapter 6


                                                                     0
                                                                          F1
      0                                                              0
                         1                 2                                        1
                    F1
      0                            F2                                                         F3
                                                      F3
                         0                                                          1
                                          0                          0
                                                                          F2
                                                                     0

           (a) Network sensitive to glitching                             (b) Glitch-free network
      Figure 6.26 Glitching is influenced by matching of signal path lengths. The annotated numbers
      indicate the signal arrival times.

      technology, but requires 2N transistors to implement a N-input logic gate. Also, the load
      capacitance is significant, since each gate drives two devices (a PMOS and an NMOS) per
      fan-out. This has opened the door for alternative logic families that either are simpler or
      faster.


      6.2.2         Ratioed Logic

      Concept
      Ratioed logic is an attempt to reduce the number of transistors required to implement a
      given logic function, at the cost of reduced robustness and extra power dissipation. The
      purpose of the PUN in complementary CMOS is to provide a conditional path between
      VDD and the output when the PDN is turned off. In ratioed logic, the entire PUN is replaced
      with a single unconditional load device that pulls up the output for a high output (Figure
      6.27a). Instead of a combination of active pull-down and pull-up networks, such a gate
      consists of an NMOS pull-down network that realizes the logic function, and a simple load
      device. Figure 6.27b shows an example of ratioed logic, which uses a grounded PMOS
      load and is referred to as a pseudo-NMOS gate.
                             VDD                                         VDD


                                   load                                    PMOS
                                                                            load

                                               F                                        F

              In1                                           In1
              In2            PDN                            In2          PDN
              In3                                           In3
                                        (a) generic                               (b) pseudo-NMOS

                                   Figure 6.27 Ratioed logic gate.

            The clear advantage of pseudo-NMOS is the reduced number of transistors (N+1
      versus 2N for complementary CMOS). The nominal high output voltage (VOH) for this
      gate is VDD since the pull-down devices are turned off when the output is pulled high
      (assuming that VOL is below VTn). On the other hand, the nominal low output voltage is
Section 6.2   Static CMOS Design                                                                                                  255


         not 0 V since there is a fight between the devices in the PDN and the grounded PMOS
         load device. This results in reduced noise margins and more importantly static power dis-
         sipation. The sizing of the load device relative to the pull-down devices can be used to
         trade-off parameters such a noise margin, propagation delay and power dissipation. Since
         the voltage swing on the output and the overall functionality of the gate depends upon the
         ratio between the NMOS and PMOS sizes, the circuit is called ratioed. This is in contrast
         to the ratioless logic styles, such as complementary CMOS, where the low and high levels
         do not depend upon transistor sizes.
                Computing the dc-transfer characteristic of the pseudo-NMOS proceeds along paths
         similar to those used for its complementary CMOS counterpart. The value of VOL is
         obtained by equating the currents through the driver and load devices for Vin = VDD. At
         this operation point, it is reasonable to assume that the NMOS device resides in linear
         mode (since the output should ideally be close to 0V), while the PMOS load is saturated.
                                                 2                                                                          2
                 k n  ( V DD – V Tn )V OL – ---------  = k  ( –V – V ) ⋅ V
                                             V OL                                    V DSAT
                                                          p     DD  Tp     DSAT – --------------                            (6.21)
                                                 2                                         2
               Assuming that VOL is small relative to the gate drive (VDD-VT) and that VTn is equal
         to VTp in magnitude, VOL can be approximated as:
                                   k p ( – V DD – V Tp ) ⋅ V DSAT µ p ⋅ W p
                            V OL ≈ --------------------------------------------------------- ≈ ----------------- ⋅ V DSAT       (6.22)
                                              k n ( V DD – V Tn )                              µn ⋅ Wn
               In order to make VOL as small as possible, the PMOS device should be sized much
         smaller than the NMOS pull-down devices. Unfortunately, this has a negative impact on
         the propagation delay for charging up the output node since the current provided by the
         PMOS device is limited.
               A major disadvantage of the pseudo-NMOS gate is the static power that is dissi-
         pated when the output is low through the direct current path that exists between VDD and
         GND. The static power consumption in the low-output mode is easily derived
                                                                                                                        2
                    P low = V DD I low ≈ V DD ⋅ k p  ( – V DD – V Tp ) ⋅ V DSATp – ----------------
                                                                                    V DSATp
                                                                                                   -                            (6.23)
                                                                                          2 

         Example 6.7 Pseudo-NMOS Inverter
               Consider a simple pseudo-NMOS inverter (where the PDN network in Figure 6.27 degener-
               ates to a single transistor) with an NMOS size of 0.5µm/0.25µm. The effect of sizing the
               PMOS device is studied in this example to demonstrate the impact on various parameters.
               The W/L ratio of the grounded PMOS is varied over values from 4, 2, 1, 0.5 to 0.25. Devices
               with a W/L < 1 are constructed by making the length longer than the width. The voltage trans-
               fer curve for the different sizes is plotted in Figure 6.28.
                       Table 6.8 summarizes the nominal output voltage (VOL), static power dissipation, and
               the low-to-high propagation delay. The low-to-high delay is measured as the time to reach
               1.25V from VOL (which is not 0V for this inverter). This is chosen since the load gate is a
               CMOS inverter with a switching threshold of 1.25V. The trade-off between the static and
               dynamic properties is apparent. A larger pull-up device improves performance, but increases
               static power dissipation and lowers noise margins (i.e., increases VOL).
256                                        DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                      Chapter 6


                3.0



                2.5



                2.0                                      W/Lp = 4


                1.5
      Vout, V




                                                        W/Lp = 2
                1.0

                          W/Lp = 0.5              W/Lp = 1
                0.5
                             W/Lp = .25
                                                                                             Figure 6.28 Voltage-transfer curves of
                                                                                             the pseudo-NMOS inverter as a
                0.0
                   0.0          0.5         1.0         1.5            2.0         2.5       function of the PMOS size.
                                                                             Vin, V

           Table 6.8Performance of a pseudo-NMOS inverter.

                                                                                 Static Power
                                Size                           VOL                Dissipation           tplh

                                  4                           0.693V               564µW               14ps
                                  2                           0.273V               298µW               56ps
                                  1                           .133V                160µW               123ps
                                 0.5                          0.064V                  80µW             268ps
                                0.25                          0.031V                  41µW             569ps

              Notice that the simple first-order model to predict VOL is quite effective. For a
           PMOS W/L of 4, VOL is given by (30/115) (4) (0.63V) = 0.66V.

               The static power dissipation of pseudo-NMOS limits its use. However, pseudo-
           NMOS still finds use in large fan-in circuits. Figure 6.29 shows the schematics of pseudo-
           NMOS NOR and NAND gates. When area is most important, the reduced transistor count
           compared to complimentary CMOS is quite attractive.
                                                                                                               VDD
                                           VDD




                                                                                                      In1             Out
                                                                             F
                                                                             CL
                      A          B         C        D
                                                                                                      In2


                                                                                                      In3
                                          (a) NOR

                         Figure 6.29 Four-input pseudo-NMOS NOR                                       In4
                         and NAND gates.                                                                             (b) NAND
Section 6.2       Static CMOS Design                                                                257



         Problem 6.4      NAND Versus NOR in Pseudo-NMOS
                  Given the choice between NOR or NAND logic, which one would you prefer for implementa-
                  tion in pseudo-NMOS?



         How to Build Even Better Loads
         It is possible to create a ratioed logic style that completely eliminates static currents and
         provides rail-to-rail swing. Such a gate combines two concepts: differential logic and pos-
         itive feedback. A differential gate requires that each input is provided in complementary
         format, and produces complementary outputs in turn. The feedback mechanism ensures
         that the load device is turned off when not needed. A example of such a logic family,
         called Differential Cascode Voltage Switch Logic (or DCVSL), is presented conceptually
         in Figure 6.30a [Heller84].
                The pull-down networks PDN1 and PDN2 use NMOS devices and are mutually
         exclusive (this is, when PDN1 conducts, PDN2 is off, and when PDN1 is off, PDN2 con-
         ducts), such that the required logic function and its inverse are simultaneously imple-
         mented. Assume now that, for a given set of inputs, PDN1 conducts while PDN2 does not,
         and that Out and Out are initially high and low, respectively. Turning on PDN1, causes
         Out to be pulled down, although there is still a fight between M1 and PDN1. Out is in a
         high impedance state, as M2 and PDN2 are both turned off. PDN1 must be strong enough
         to bring Out below VDD-|VTp|, the point at which M2 turns on and starts charging Out to
         VDD —eventually turning off M1. This in turn enables Out to discharge all the way to GND.
         Figure 6.30b shows an example of an XOR/XNOR gate. Notice that it is possible to share
         transistors among the two pull-down networks, which reduces the implementation over-
         head
                          VDD                     VDD                                VDD



                         M1                        M2                                              Out

                                                                       Out
         Out                                               Out

              A                                                        B       B      B       B
              A
              B          PDN1                 PDN2
              B                                                            A              A



                            (a) Basic principle                                (b) XOR-XNOR gate
                                       Figure 6.30 DCVSL logic gate.

               The resulting circuit exhibits a rail-to-rail swing, and the static power dissipation is
         eliminated: in steady state, none of the stacked pull-down networks and load devices are
         simultaneously conducting. However, the circuit is still ratioed since the sizing of the
         PMOS devices relative to the pull-down devices is critical to functionality, not just perfor-
258                         DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                     Chapter 6


      mance. In addition to the problem of increase complexity in design, this circuit style still
      has a power-dissipation problem that is due to cross-over currents. During the transition,
      there is a period of time when PMOS and PDN are turned on simultaneously, producing a
      short circuit path.

      Example 6.8 DCVSL Transient Response
            An example transient response is shown for an AND/NAND gate in DCVSL. Notice
            that as Out is pulled down to VDD-|VTp|, Out starts to charge up to VDD quickly. The
            delay from the input to Out is 197 psec and to Out is 321 psec. A static CMOS AND
            gate (NAND followed by an inverter) has a delay of 200ps.

                                                                     2.5
          Out = A B                      Out = A B
                                                                                           AB



                                                         Voltage,V
                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                 AB
             A     M1                         M4
                           A      M3 B                                               A,B
                                                                     0.5      A,B

             B     M2
                                                                     -0.5 0    0.2     0.4      0.6   0.8      1.0
                                                                                       Time, ns
            Figure 6.31Transient response of a simple AND/NAND DCVSL gate. M1 and M2
            1µm/0.25µm, M3 and M4 are 0.5µm/0.25µm and the cross-coupled PMOS devices are
            1.5µm/0.25µm.




        Design Consideration: Single-ended versus Differential

      The DCVSL gate provides differential (or complementary) outputs. Both the output signal
      (Vout1) and its inverted value (Vout2) are simultaneously available. This is a distinct advantage,
      as it eliminates the need for an extra inverter to produce the complementary signal. It has been
      observed that a differential implementation of a complex function may reduce the number of
      gates required by a factor of two! The number of gates in the critical timing path is often
      reduced as well. Finally, the approach prevents some of the time-differential problems intro-
      duced by additional inverters. For example, in logic design it often happens that both a signal
      and its complement are needed simultaneously. When the complementary signal is generated
      using an inverter, the inverted signal is delayed with respect to the original (Figure 6.32a). This
      causes timing problems, especially in very high-speed designs. The differential output capabil-
      ity avoids this problem (Figure 6.32b).
              With all these positive properties, why not always use differential logic? Well, the differ-
      ential nature virtually doubles the number of wires that has to be routed, leading very often to
      unwieldy designs (on top of the additional implementation overhead in the individual gates).
      Additionally, the dynamic power dissipation is high.
Section 6.2          Static CMOS Design                                                                                      259


                                                                           Vout2

                      Vout1           Vout2           Vin
Vin

                                                                           Vout1




       Vout1                      Vout2
                                                       Vout1                       Vout2



                                                                                           Figure 6.32 Advantage of differential
               (a) Single-ended                                                            (b) over single-ended (a) gate.
                                                               (b) Differential




          6.2.3           Pass-Transistor Logic

          Pass-Transistor Basics
          A popular and widely-used alternative to complementary CMOS is pass-transistor logic,
          which attempts to reduce the number of transistors required to implement logic by allow-
          ing the primary inputs to drive gate terminals as well as source/drain terminals
          [Radhakrishnan85]. This is in contrast to logic families that we have studied so far, which
          only allow primary inputs to drive the gate terminals of MOSFETS.
                 Figure 6.33 shows an implementation of the AND
                                                                              B
          function constructed that way, using only NMOS tran-
          sistors. In this gate, if the B input is high, the top transis- A
          tor is turned on and copies the input A to the output F.                 B
                                                                                            F = AB
          When B is low, the bottom pass transistor is turned on
          and passes a 0. The switch driven by B seems to be              0
          redundant at first glance. Its presence is essential to Figure 6.33 Pass-transistor
          ensure that the gate is static, this is that a low-imped- implementation of an AND gate.
          ance path exists to the supply rails under all circum-
          stances, or, in this particular case, when B is low.
          The promise of this approach is that fewer transistors are required to implement a given
          function. For example, the implementation of the AND gate in Figure 6.33 requires 4 tran-
          sistors (including the inverter required to invert B), while a complementary CMOS imple-
          mentation would require 6 transistors. The reduced number of devices has the additional
          advantage of lower capacitance.
                 Unfortunately, as discussed earlier, an NMOS device is effective at passing a 0 but
          is poor at pulling a node to VDD. When the pass transistor pulls a node high, the output
          only charges up to VDD -VTn. In fact, the situation is worsened by the fact that the devices
          experience body effect, as there exists a significant source-to-body voltage when pulling
          high. Consider the case when the pass transistor is charging up a node with the gate and
          drain terminals set at VDD. Let the source of the NMOS pass transistor be labeled x. Node
          x will charge up to VDD-VTn(Vx):

                                          V x = V DD – ( Vtn0 + γ ( (      2φf + V x ) –     2φ f ) )                     (6.24)
260                           DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                              Chapter 6


      Example 6.9 Voltage swing for pass transistors circuits
            Assuming a power supply voltage of 2.5V, the transient response of Figure 6.34 shows the
            output of a NMOS charging up (where the drain voltage is at VDD and the gate voltage in is
            ramped from 0V to VDD). Assume that node x was initially 0. Also notice that if IN is low,
                                                                        3.0
                                                                                                                  In
                       IN
                                                                                      Out
                                      1.5µm/0.25µm                      2.0
                                                                                                    x




                                                           Voltage, V
              VDD                 x
                                                 Out
                 0.5µm/0.25µm
                                      0.5µm/0.25µm                      1.0




                                                                        0.0 0        0.5           1        1.5              2
                                                                                                 Time, ns

         Figure 6.34 Transient response of charging up a node using an N device. Notice the slow tail
         after an initial quick response.


            node x is in a high impedance state (not driven to one of the rails using a low resistance path).
            Extra transistors can be added to provide a path to GND, but for this discussion, the simplified
            circuit is sufficient. Notice that the output charges up quickly initially, but has slow tail. This
            is attributed to the fact that the drive (gate to source voltage) reduces significantly as the out-
            put approaches VDD-VTn and the current available to charge up node x reduces drastically.
            Hand calculation using Eq. (6.24), results in an output voltage of 1.8V, which comes close to
            the simulated value.



      WARNING:
      The above example demonstrates that pass-transistor gates cannot be cascaded by con-
      necting the output of a pass gate to the gate input of another pass transistor. This is
      illustrated in Figure 6.35a, where the output of M1 (node x) drives the gate of another
      MOS device. Node x can charge up to VDD-VTn1. If node C has a rail to rail swing, node Y
      only charges up to the voltage on node x - VTn2, which works out to VDD-VTn1-VTn2. Figure
      6.35b on the other hand has the output of M1 (x) driving the junction of M2, and there is
      only one threshold drop. This is the proper way of cascading pass gates.
                      B
                              x                                                 B           C
                 A
                     M1
                                                                                     x             Y
                                                                          A                                            Out
                                       Y                                        M1          M2
                          C                          Out
                              M2                                   Swing on Y = VDD- VTn1
                 Swing on Y = VDD- VTn- VTn2
                              (a)                                            (b)
       Figure 6.35 Pass transistor output (Drain/Source) terminal should not drive other gate terminals to
       avoid multiple threshold drops.
Section 6.2       Static CMOS Design                                                                                                  261


         Example 6.10 VTC of the pass transistor AND gate
                   The voltage transfer curve of a pass-transistor gate shows little resemblance to complemen-
                   tary CMOS. Consider the AND gate shown in Figure 6.36. Similar to complementary CMOS,
                   the VTC of pass transistor logic is data-dependent. For the case when B = VDD, the top pass
                   transistor is turned on, while the bottom one is turned off. In this case, the output just follows
                   the input A until the input is high enough to turn off the top pass transistor (i.e., reaches VDD-
                   VTn). Next consider the case when A=VDD, and B makes a transition from 0 → 1. Since the
                   inverter has a threshold of VDD/2, the bottom pass transistor is turned on till then and the out-
                   put is close to zero. Once the bottom pass transistor turns off, the output follows the input B
                   minus a threshold drop. A similar behavior is observed when both inputs A and B transition
                   from 0 → 1.
                          Observe that a pure pass-transistor gate is not regenerative. A gradual signal degrada-
                   tion will be observed after passing through a number of subsequent stages. This can be reme-
                   died by the occasional insertion of a CMOS inverter. With the inclusion of an inverter in the
                   signal path, the VTC resembles the one of CMOS gates.


                                1.5µm/0.25µm
                                                                        2.0

                                0.5µm/0.25µm                                              B=VDD, A = 0→VDD
                                                              Vout, V




                            B

                     A
                 0.5µm/0.25µm                                           1.0
                             B                                                                                     A=Vdd, B = 0→VDD
                                              F = AB
                                                                                                                   A= B = 0→VDD
                    0
                            0.5µm/0.25µm
                                                                        0.00.0                      1.0                   2.0
                                                                                                          Vin, V
              Figure 6.36 Voltage Transfer Characteristic for the pass-transistor AND gate of Figure 6.33.


               Pass-transistors require lower switching energy to charge up a node due to the
         reduced voltage swing. For the pass transistor circuit in Figure 6.34 assume that the drain
         voltage is at VDD and the gate voltage transitions to VDD. The output node charges from 0V
         to VDD-VTn (assuming that node x was initially at 0V) and the energy drawn from the
         power supply for charging the output of a pass transistor is given by:

                        T                 T                             ( V DD – V Tn )

          E0 → 1 =
                        ∫ P (t )dt = V ∫ isupply (t )dt = V
                                     DD                       DD              ∫           C L dV out = C L • V DD • ( V DD – V Tn ) (6.25)

                        0                 0                                   0

              While the circuit exhibits lower switching power, it may consumes static power
         when the output is high—the reduced voltage level may be insufficient to turn off the
         PMOS transistor of the subsequent CMOS inverter.
262                         DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                    Chapter 6


                                   A
                                              Pass-Transistor
                                   A                                         F
                                   B            Network
                                   B


                                   A            Inverse
                                   A          Pass-Transistor                F
                                   B
                                   B            Network

                                           (a) Basic concept

           B      B                             B      B                         B   B


      A                                   A                              A

      B                F = AB             B                 F=A+B        A               F=A⊕B

      A                                   A                              A

      B                 F = AB            B                 F=A+B        A               F=A⊕B

           AND/NAND                            OR/NOR                     XOR/NXOR
                                  (b) Example pass-transistor networks

          Figure 6.37 Complementary pass-transistor logic (CPL).



      Differential Pass Transistor Logic
      For high performance design, a differential pass-transistor logic family, called CPL or
      DPL, is commonly used. The basic idea (similar to DCVSL) is to accept true and comple-
      mentary inputs and produce true and complementary outputs. A number of CPL gates
      (AND/NAND, OR/NOR, and XOR/NXOR) are shown in Figure 6.37. These gates pos-
      sess a number of interesting properties:
          • Since the circuits are differential, complementary data inputs and outputs are always
            available. Although generating the differential signals requires extra circuitry, the
            differential style has the advantage that some complex gates such as XORs and
            adders can be realized efficiently with a small number of transistors. Furthermore,
            the availability of both polarities of every signal eliminates the need for extra invert-
            ers, as is often the case in static CMOS or pseudo-NMOS.
          • CPL belongs to the class of static gates, because the output-defining nodes are
            always connected to either VDD or GND through a low resistance path. This is
            advantageous for the noise resilience.
          • The design is very modular. In effect, all gates use exactly the same topology. Only
            the inputs are permutated. This makes the design of a library of gates very simple.
            More complex gates can be built by cascading the standard pass-transistor modules.
Section 6.2       Static CMOS Design                                                                            263


         Example 6.11 Four-input NAND in CPL
                  Consider the implementation of a four-input AND/NAND gate using CPL. Based on the asso-
                  ciativity of the boolean AND operation [A·B·C·D = (A·B)·(C·D)], a two-stage approach has
                  been adopted to implement the gate (Figure 6.38). The total number of transistors in the gate
                  (including the final buffer) is 14. This is substantially higher than previously discussed gates.
                  This factor, combined with the complicated routing requirements, makes this circuit style not
                  particularly efficient for this gate. One should, however, be aware of the fact that the structure
                  simultaneously implements the AND and the NAND functions, which might reduce the tran-
                  sistor count of the overall circuit.

                                                                                    B    B
                   B          A          Out            C       D
                                                                               A
                                                                               B              X       X    X
                                  X                 Y                          A
                                                                               B              X   Y
                                                                                                  X             Out
                                                                                    D    D
                                  X                 Y                                             Y
                                                                               C                  X             Out
                                                                               D              Y
              B              A           Out            C            D         C
                                                                               D              Y
          Figure 6.38 Layout and schematics of four-input NAND-gate using CPL (the final inverter stage is
          omitted). See also Colorplate 9.



                In summary, CPL is a conceptually simple and modular logic style. Its applicability
         depends strongly upon the logic function to be implemented. The availability of a simple
         XOR as well of the ease of implementing some specific gate structures makes it attractive
         for structures such as adders and multipliers. Some extremely fast and efficient implemen-
         tations have been reported in that application domain [Yano90]. When considering CPL,
         the designer should not ignore the implicit routing overhead of the complementary signals,
         which is apparent in the layout of Figure 6.38.

         Robust and Efficient Pass-Transistor Design
         Unfortunately, differential pass-transistor logic, like single-ended pass-transistor logic,
         suffers from static power dissipation and reduced noise margins, since the high input to
         the signal-restoring inverter only charges up to VDD-VTn. There are several solutions pro-
         posed to deal with this problem as outlined below.
         Solution 1: Level Restoration. A common solution to the voltage drop problem is the
         use of a level restorer, which is a single PMOS configured in a feedback path (Figure
         6.39). The gate of the PMOS device is connected to the output of the inverter, its drain
         connected to the input of the inverter and the source to VDD. Assume that node X is at 0V
         (out is at VDD and the Mr is turned off) with B = VDD and A = 0. If input A makes a 0 to VDD
         transition, Mn only charges up node X to VDD-VTn. This is, however, enough to switch the
264                              DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                       Chapter 6


      output of the inverter low, turning on the feedback device Mr and pulling node X all the
      way to VDD. This eliminates any static power dissipation in the inverter. Furthermore, no
      static current path can exist through the level restorer and the pass-transistor, since the
      restorer is only active when A is high. In summary, this circuit has the advantage that all
      voltage levels are either at GND or VDD, and no static power is consumed.

          Level restorer    VDD
                                            VDD
                            Mr
                  B
                                            M2
                                  X                      Out
      A           Mn

                                             M1

                                                                       Figure 6.39 Level-restoring circuit.

             While this solution is appealing in terms of eliminating static power dissipation, it
      adds complexity since the circuit is now ratioed. The problem arises during the transition
      of node X from high-to-low. The pass transistor network attempts to pull-down node X
      while the level restorer pulls now X to VDD. Therefore, the pull-down device must be
      stronger than the pull-up device in order to switch node X and the output. Some careful
      transistor sizing is necessary to make the circuit function correctly. Assume the notation
      R1 to denote the equivalent on-resistance of transistor M1, R2 for M2 , and so on. When Rr is
      made too small, it is impossible to bring the voltage at node X below the switching thresh-
      old of the inverter. Hence, the inverter output never switches to VDD, and the level-restor-
      ing transistor stays on. This sizing problem can be reformulated as follows: the resistance
      of Mn and Mr must be such that the voltage at node X drops below the threshold of the
      inverter, VM = f(R1, R2). This condition is sufficient to guarantee a switching of the output
      voltage Vout to VDD and a turning off of the level-restoring transistor.
                             VDD
                                          VDD
                             Mr
                       B
                                          M2
                                   X
       A=0             Mn                              Out

                                           M1                    Figure 6.40 Transistor-sizing problem
                                                                 for level-restoring circuit.



      Example 6.12 Sizing of a Level Restorer
              Analyzing the circuit as a whole is nontrivial, because the restoring transistor acts as a feed-
              back device. One way to simplify the circuit for manual analysis is to open the feedback loop
              and to ground the gate of the restoring transistor when determining the switching point (this is
              a reasonable assumption, as the feedback only becomes effective once the inverter starts to
Section 6.2                  Static CMOS Design                                                                             265


                             switch). Hence, Mr and Mn form a “pseudo-NMOS-like” configuration, with Mr the load tran-
                             sistor and Mn acting as a pull-down device to GND. Assume that the inverter M1, M2 is sized
                             to have the switching point at VDD/2 (NMOS: 0.5µm/0.25µm and PMOS: 1.5µm/0.25µm).
                             Therefore, node X must be pulled below VDD/2 in order to switch the inverter and shut off Mr.
                                     This is confirmed in Figure 6.42, which shows the transient response as the size of the
                             level restorer is varied while keeping the size of Mn fixed (0.5µm/0.25µm). As the simulation
                             indicates, for sizes above 1.5µm/0.25µm, node X can’t be brought below the switching
                             threshold of the inverter and can’t switch the output. The detailed derivation of sizing require-
                             ment will be presented in the sequential design chapter. An important point to observe here is
                             that the sizing of Mr is critical for DC functionality, not just performance!
                           3.0




                           2.0
                                                      W/Lr =1.75/0.25
              Voltage, V




                                                              W/Lr =1.50/0.25

                           1.0
                                                                                    Figure 6.41Transient response of the
                                                                                    circuit in Figure 6.40. A level restorer
                                       W/Lr =1.0/0.25        W/Lr =1.25/0.25
                                                                                    that is too large can result in incorrect
                                                                                    evaluation.
                           0.0 0      100       200       300      400       500
                                                        Time, psec


               Another concern is the influence of the level restorer on the switching speed of the
         device. Adding the restoring device increases the capacitance at the internal node X, slow-
         ing down the gate. The rise time of the gate is further negatively affected, since, the level-
         restoring transistor Mr fights the decrease in voltage at node X before being switched off.
         On the other hand, the level restorer reduces the fall time, since the PMOS transistor, once
         turned on, speeds the pull-up action.

         Problem 6.5                  Device Sizing in Pass Transistors
                             For the circuit shown in Figure 6.40, assume that the pull-down device consists of 6 pass tran-
                             sistors in series each with a device size of 0.5µm/0.25µm (replacing transistor Mn). Determine
                             the maximum W/L size for the level restorer transistor for correct functionality.

                A modification of the level-restorer, applicable in differential networks and known
         as swing-restored pass transistor logic, is shown in Figure 6.42. Instead of a simple
         inverter or half-latch at the output of the pass transistor network, two back-to-back invert-
         ers, configured in a cross-coupled fashion, are used for level restoration and performance
         improvement. Inputs are fed to both the gate and source/drain terminals as in the case of
         conventional pass transistor networks. Figure 6.42 shows a simple XOR/XNOR gate of
         three variables A, B and C. Notice that the complementary network can be optimized by
         sharing transistors between the true and complementary outputs.
266                          DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                         Chapter 6


                         VDD                      VDD
                                                                                          VDD              VDD
                             M2                    M2
                 Out                                            Out                       M2               M2
                                                                             Out                                         Out
                         M1                        M1
                                                                                          M1               M1


                               Complementary Output
                             NMOS Pass Transistor Network
                                                                       C            C                            C             C



                                                                       B            B                            B             B

        Complementary inputs                                                    A           A          A             A
        to gate and source/drain
        terminals
                           (a) general concept                                                  (b) XOR/XNOR gate

       Figure 6.42 Swing-restored pass transistor logic [Parameswar96].

      Solution 2: Multiple-Threshold Transistors. A technology solution to the voltage-drop
      problem associated with pass-transistor logic is the use of multiple-threshold devices.
      Using zero threshold devices for the NMOS pass-transistors eliminates most of the thresh-
      old drop, and passes a signal close to VDD. Notice that even if the devices threshold was
      implanted to be exactly equal to zero, the body effect of the device prevents a swing to
      VDD. All devices other than the pass transistors (i.e., the inverters) are implemented using
      standard high-threshold devices. The use of multiple-threshold transistors is becoming
      more common, and involves simple modifications to existing process flows.
                       VDD
                                                            Zero (or low)-threshold transistor

                                                                      VDD
        0V                                2.5 V




                       VDD                0V                                        Out




         2.5 V
                                                                            Figure 6.43 Static power consumption when
                                                                            using zero-threshold pass-transistors.

            The use of zero-threshold transistors can be dangerous due to the subthreshold cur-
      rents that can flow through the pass-transistors, even if VGS is slightly below VT. This is
      demonstrated in Figure 6.43, which points out a potential sneak dc-current path. While
      these leakage paths are not critical when the device is switching constantly, they do pose a
      significant energy-overhead when the circuit is in the idle state.
Section 6.2      Static CMOS Design                                                                              267


                      C
                                                           C
                                                                             Figure 6.44 CMOS transmission gate.
       A                             B
                                                 A                   B

                                                           C
                      C
                                               (b) Symbolic representation
                  (a) Circuit

           Solution 3: Transmission Gate Logic. The most widely-used solution to deal with the
           voltage-drop problem is the use of transmission gates. It builds on the complementary
           properties of NMOS and PMOS transistors: NMOS devices pass a strong 0 but a weak 1,
           while PMOS transistors pass a strong 1 but a weak 0. The ideal approach is to use an
           NMOS to pull-down and a PMOS to pull-up. The transmission gate combines the best of
           both device flavors by placing a NMOS device in parallel with a PMOS device (Figure
           6.44a). The control signals to the transmission gate (C and C) are complementary. The
           transmission gate acts as a bidirectional switch controlled by the gate signal C. When C =
           1, both MOSFETs are on, allowing the signal to pass through the gate. In short,

                                                     A = B      if   C=1                                       (6.26)
           On the other hand, C = 0 places both transistors in cutoff, creating an open circuit between
           nodes A and B. Figure 6.44b shows a commonly used transmission-gate symbol.
                  Consider the case of charging node B to VDD for the transmission gate circuit in Fig-
           ure 6.45a. Node A is driven to VDD and transmission gate is enabled (C = 1 and C= 0). If
           only the NMOS pass-device were present, node B charges up to VDD-VTn at which point
           the NMOS device turns off. However, since the PMOS device is present and turned on
           (VGSp = -VDD), charging continues all the way up to VDD. Figure 6.45b shows the opposite
           case, this is discharging node B to 0. B is initially at VDD when node A is driven low. The
           PMOS transistor by itself can only pull down node B to VTp at which point it turns off. The
           parallel NMOS device however stays turned on (since its VGS = VDD) and pulls node B all
           the way to GND. Though the transmission gate requires two transistors and more control
           signals, it enables rail-to-rail swing.
                  C = VDD                                      C = VDD

                          B (initially at 0)                          B (initially at VDD)
  A = VDD                                       A=0


                                                                                      Figure 6.45 Transmission gates
                  C=0                                                                 enable rail-to-rail switching
                                                               C=0
              (a) charging node B                        (a) discharging node B

                 Transmission gates can be used to build some complex gates very efficiently. Figure
           6.46 shows an example of a simple inverting two-input multiplexer. This gate either
268                            DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                 Chapter 6


        selects input A or B based on the value of the control signal S, which is equivalent to
        implementing the following Boolean function:

                                            F = (A ⋅ S + B ⋅ S)                               (6.27)
        A complementary implementation of the gate requires eight transistors instead of six.
                                                          S           S
                                            VDD


                            VDD
                S

        A                      M2                                                               Out

            S                       F
                               M1
        B


                S
                                            GND

                                                           S      S
                                                      A                   B
      Figure 6.46 Transmission gate multiplexer and its layout.

               Another example of the effective use of transmission gates is the popular XOR cir-
        cuit shown in Figure 6.47. The complete implementation of this gate requires only six
        transistors (including the inverter used for the generation of B), compared to the twelve
        transistors required for a complementary implementation. To understand the operation of
        this circuit, we have to analyze the B = 0 and B = 1 cases separately. For B = 1, transistors
        M1 and M2 act as an inverter while the transmission gate M3/M4 is off; hence F = AB. In
        the opposite case, M1 and M2 are disabled, and the transmission gate is operational, or F =
        AB. The combination of both results in the XOR function. Notice that, regardless of the
        values of A and B, node F always has a connection to either VDD or GND and is hence a
        low-impedance node. When designing static-pass transistor networks, it is essential to
        adhere to the low-impedance rule under all circumstances. Other examples where trans-
        mission-gate logic is effectively used are fast adder circuits and registers.
                           B

                                        B
                         M2

            A                                     A
                                F
                          M1                M3/M4     Figure 6.47 Transmission gate XOR.
                                        B
                           B
Section 6.2   Static CMOS Design                                                                                                                                                                           269


         Performance of Pass-Transistor and Transmission Gate Logic
         The pass-transistor and the transmission gate are, unfortunately, not ideal switches, and
         have a series resistance associated with it. To quantify the resistance, consider the circuit
         in Figure 6.48, which involves charging a node from 0 V to VDD. In this discussion, we use
         the large-signal definition of resistance, which involves dividing the voltage across the
         switch by the drain current. The effective resistance of the switch is modeled as a parallel
         connection of the resistances Rn and Rp of the NMOS and PMOS devices, defined as (VDD
         – Vout)/In and (VDD – Vout)/Ip, respectively. The currents through the devices are obviously
         dependent on the value of Vout and the operating mode of the transistors. During the low-
         to-high transition, the pass-transistors traverse through a number of operation modes. For
         low values of Vout, the NMOS device is saturated and the resistance is approximated as:
                      V DD – V out                                                                      V DD – V out
                R n = ------------------------------- = --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   IN                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                   W                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                  V DSAT
                                                        k′ n  -----  ( V DD – V out – V Tn )V DSAT – -------------------
                                                                    L N                                                                                                  2 
                                                                                           V            –V
                                                               ≈ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                             DD                 out                           -
                                                                    k n ( V DD – V out – V Tn )V DSAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (6.28)
         The resistance goes up for increasing values of Vout, and approaches infinity when Vout
         reaches VDD-VTn, this is when the device shuts off. Similarly, we can analyze the behavior
         of the PMOS transistor. When Vout is small, the PMOS is saturated, but it enters the linear
         mode of operation for Vout approaching VDD, giving the following approximated resis-
         tance:
                              V DD – V out                                                                          V DD – V out
                        R p = ------------------------------- = --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                           IP                                                                                                                 ( V out – V DD ) 2
                                                                k p ⋅  ( – V DD – V Tp ) ( V out – V DD ) – ---------------------------------                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                             2                    
                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                           ≈ ------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                 k p ( V DD – V Tp )
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (6.29)
                The simulated value of Req = Rp || Rn as a function of Vout is plotted in Figure 6.48. It
         can be observed that Req is relatively constant (≈ 8kΩ in this particular case). The same is
         true in other design instances (for instance, when discharging CL). When analyzing trans-
         mission-gate networks, the simplifying assumption that the switch has a constant resistive
         value is therefore acceptable.

         Problem 6.6               Equivalent Resistance During Discharge
               Determine the equivalent resistance by simulation for the high-to-low transition of a transmis-
               sion gate (this is, produce a plot similar to the one presented in Figure 6.48).

               An important consideration is the delay associated with a chain of transmission
         gates. Figure 6.49 shows a chain of n transmission gates. Such a configuration often
         occurs in circuits such as adders or deep multiplexors. Assume that all transmission gates
         are turned on and a step is applied at the input. To analyze the propagation delay of this
270                                             DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                                Chapter 6

                                   30


                                                                                                                        2.5 V
                Resistance, ohms                                        Rn                                                            Rn

                                   20         Rp
                                                                                                             2.5 V                     Vout

                                                                                                                                  Rp
                                                                                                                            0V
                                   10
                                                     Rn || Rp




                                   0
                                    0.0                      1.0                        2.0
                                                                    Vout, V
           Figure 6.48 Simulated equivalent resistance of transmission gate for low-to-high transition
           (for (W/L)n = (W/L)p = 0.5µm/0.25µm). A similar response for overall resistance is obtained for the
           high-to-low transition
           network, the transmission gates are replaced by their equivalent resistances Req. This pro-
           duces the network of Figure 6.49b.
           The delay of a network of n transmission gates in sequence can be estimated using the
           Elmore approximation (see Chapter 4):
                                                                    n
                                                                                                         n( n + 1)
                                              t p ( V n ) = 0.69   ∑ CR k = 0.69CR -------------------
                                                                              eq
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                    eq                                        (6.30)
                                                                   k=0

           This means that the propagation delay is proportional to n2 and increases rapidly with the
           number of switches in the chain.
                                        2.5                             2.5                   2.5                                 2.5
                                               V1         Vi-1                     Vi                      Vi+1      Vn–1                     Vn
           In

                                                         C                              C                    C              C                      C
                                        0                                0                    0                                   0


                                                             (a) A chain of transmission gates

                                        Req                         Req                     Req                                  Req
                                               V1                                  Vi                      Vi+1      Vn-1                     Vn
           In

                                                    C                                   C                    C              C                      C



                                                                 (b) Equivalent RC network

      Figure 6.49 Speed optimization in transmission-gate networks.
Section 6.2               Static CMOS Design                                                                                                            271


                   Example 6.13 Delay through 16 transmission gates
                          Consider 16 cascaded minimum-sized transmission gates, each with an average resistance of
                          8 kΩ. The node capacitance consists of the capacitance of two NMOS and PMOS devices
                          (junction and gate). Since the gate inputs are assumed to be fixed, there is no Miller multipli-
                          cation. The capacitance can be calculated to be approximately 3.6 fF for the low-to-high tran-
                          sition. The delay is given by:

                                                             n (n + 1)                                         16 ( 16 + 1 )
                                    t
                                        p =
                                              0.69 ⋅ CR
                                                          eq -------------------- = 0.69 ⋅ ( 3.6fF ) ( 8KΩ )  --------------------------  ≈ 2.7ns   (6.31)
                                                                      2                                                   2              

                                  The transient response for this particular example is shown in Figure 6.50. The simu-
                          lated delay is 2.7ns. It is remarkable that a simple RC model predicts the delay so accurately.
                          It is also clear that the use of long pass transistor chains causes significant delay degradation.
                 3.0
                         Out1       Out2




                 2.0
    Voltage, V




                                                                             Out16


                 1.0


                                                                                                          Figure 6.50 Transient response of 16
                 0.0 0                                                                                    transmission gates cascaded in series.
                                2             4         6                    8              10
                                              Time (ns)


                         The most common approach for dealing with the long delay is to break the chain and
                   by inserting buffers every m switches (Figure 6.51). Assuming a propagation delay tbuf for
                   each buffer, the overall propagation delay of the transmission-gate/buffer network is then
                   computed as follows,

                                                                       m(m + 1)
                                                 t p = 0.69 ---- CR eq ----------------------- +  ---- – 1 t buf
                                                             n                                      n
                                                            m                    2               m        
                                                                                                                                                      (6.32)
                                                                  n(m + 1)
                                                     = 0.69 CR eq --------------------- +  ---- – 1 t buf
                                                                                             n
                                                                            2             m        

                   The resulting delay exhibits only a linear dependence on the number of switches n, in con-
                   trast to the unbuffered circuit, which is quadratic in n. The optimal number of switches
                                                                                                                            ∂t p
                   mopt between buffers can be found by setting the derivative                                                   to 0, which yields
                                                                                                                            ∂m

                                                                                     t pbuf
                                                                                              -
                                                                        m opt = 1.7 -----------                                                       (6.33)
                                                                                    CR eq
272                              DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                         Chapter 6


        Obviously, the number of switches per segment grows with increasing values of tbuf. In
        current technologies, mopt is typically around 3.
                                  m


                   Req          Req        Req                  Req          Req        Req
         In
                            C         CC         C                       C         CC         C


              Figure 6.51 Breaking up long transmission gate chains by inserting buffers.


        Example 6.14 Transmission Gate Chain
                Consider the same 16 transmission gate chain. The buffers shown in Figure 6.51 can be
                implemented as inverters (instead of two cascaded inverters). In some cases, it might be nec-
                essary to add an extra inverter to produce the correct polarity. Assuming that each inverter is
                sized such that the NMOS is 0.5µm/0.25µm and PMOS is 0.5µm /0.25µm, Eq. (6.33) predicts
                that an inverter must be inserted every 3 transmission gates. The simulated delay when plac-
                ing an inverter every two transmission gates equals 154 psec, for every three transmission
                gates is 154 psec, and for four transmission gates is 164 psec. The insertion of buffering
                inverters reduces the delay with a factor of almost 2.



        CAUTION: Although many of the circuit styles discussed in the previous sections sound
        very exciting, and might be superior to static CMOS in many respects, none of them has
        the robustness and ease of design of complementary CMOS. Therefore, use them spar-
        ingly and with caution. For designs that have no extreme area, complexity, or speed con-
        straints, complementary CMOS is the recommended design style.



6.3   Dynamic CMOS Design

        It was noted earlier that static CMOS logic with a fan-in of N requires 2N devices. A vari-
        ety of approaches were presented to reduce the number of transistors required to imple-
        ment a given logic function including pseudo-NMOS, pass transistor logic, etc. The
        pseudo-NMOS logic style requires only N + 1 transistors to implement an N input logic
        gate, but unfortunately it has static power dissipation. In this section, an alternate logic
        style called dynamic logic is presented that obtains a similar result, while avoiding static
        power consumption. With the addition of a clock input, it uses a sequence of precharge
        and conditional evaluation phases.


        6.3.1      Dynamic Logic: Basic Principles

        The basic construction of an (n-type) dynamic logic gate is shown in Figure 6.52a. The
        PDN (pull-down network) is constructed exactly as in complementary CMOS. The opera-
Section 6.3   Dynamic CMOS Design                                                                 273


         tion of this circuit is divided into two major phases: precharge and evaluation, with the
         mode of operation determined by the clock signal CLK.
                               VDD                                        VDD


                                                               CLK         Mp
                     CLK        Mp
                                           Out                                       Out


                                                 CL
                  In1                                           A
                  In2          PDN                                                     C
                  In3                                           B


                        CLK     Me                               CLK       Me



                           (a) n-type network                        (b) Example
          Figure 6.52 Basic concepts of a dynamic gate.



         Precharge
         When CLK = 0, the output node Out is precharged to VDD by the PMOS transistor Mp.
         During that time, the evaluate NMOS transistor Me is off, so that the pull-down path is dis-
         abled. The evaluation FET eliminates any static power that would be consumed during the
         precharge period (this is, static current would flow between the supplies if both the pull-
         down and the precharge device were turned on simultaneously).

         Evaluation
         For CLK = 1, the precharge transistor Mp is off, and the evaluation transistor Me is turned
         on. The output is conditionally discharged based on the input values and the pull-down
         topology. If the inputs are such that the PDN conducts, then a low resistance path exists
         between Out and GND and the output is discharged to GND. If the PDN is turned off, the
         precharged value remains stored on the output capacitance CL, which is a combination of
         junction capacitances, the wiring capacitance, and the input capacitance of the fan-out
         gates. During the evaluation phase, the only possible path between the output node and a
         supply rail is to GND. Consequently, once Out is discharged, it cannot be charged again till
         then next precharge operation. The inputs to the gate can therefore make at most one tran-
         sition during evaluation. Notice that the output can be in the high-impedance state during
         the evaluation period if the pull-down network is turned off. This behavior is fundamen-
         tally different from the static counterpart that always has a low resistance path between the
         output and one of the power rails.
                As as an example, consider the circuit shown in Figure 6.52b. During the precharge
         phase (CLK=0), the output is precharged to VDD regardless of the input values since the
         evaluation device is turned off. During evaluation (CLK=1), a conducting path is created
274                       DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                     Chapter 6


      between Out and GND if (and only if) A·B+C is TRUE. Otherwise, the output remains at
      the precharged state of VDD. The following function is thus realized:

                                Out = CLK + ( A ⋅ B + C ) ⋅ CLK                              (6.34)
      A number of important properties can be derived for the dynamic logic gate:
         • The logic function is implemented by the NMOS pull-down network. The construc-
           tion of the PDN proceeds just as it does for static CMOS.
         • The number of transistors (for complex gates) is substantially lower than in the
           static case: N + 2 versus 2N.
         • It is non-ratioed. The sizing of the PMOS precharge device is not important for real-
           izing proper functionality of the gate. The size of the precharge device can be made
           large to improve the low-to-high transition time (of course, at a cost to the high-to-
           low transition time). There is however, a trade-off with power dissipation since a
           larger precharge device directly increases clock-power dissipation.
         • It only consumes dynamic power. Ideally, no static current path ever exists between
           VDD and GND. The overall power dissipation, however, can be significantly higher
           compared to a static logic gate.
         • The logic gates have faster switching speeds. There are two main reasons for this.
           The first (obvious) reason is due to the reduced load capacitance attributed to the
           lower number of transistors per gate and the single-transistor load per fan-in. Sec-
           ond, the dynamic gate does not have short circuit current, and all the current pro-
           vided by the pull-down devices goes towards discharging the load capacitance.
             The low and high output levels VOL and VOH are easily identified as GND and VDD
      and are not dependent upon the transistor sizes. The other VTC parameters are dramati-
      cally different from static gates. Noise margins and switching thresholds have been
      defined as static quantities that are not a function of time. To be functional, a dynamic gate
      requires a periodic sequence of precharges and evaluations. Pure static analysis, therefore,
      does not apply. During the evaluate period, the pull-down network of a dynamic inverter
      starts to conduct when the input signal exceeds the threshold voltage (VTn) of the NMOS
      pull-down transistor. Therefore, it is reasonable to set the switching threshold (VM) as well
      as VIH and VIL of the gate equal to VTn. This translates to a low value for the NML.

        Design Consideration

      It is also possible to implement dynamic logic using a complimentary approach, where the out-
      put node is connected by a pre-discharge NMOS transistor to GND, and the evaluation PUN
      network is implemented in PMOS. The operation is similar: during precharge, the output node
      is discharged to GND. During evaluation, the output is conditionally charged to VDD. This p-
      type dynamic gate has the disadvantage of being slower than the n-type due to the lower cur-
      rent drive of the PMOS transistors.
Section 6.3       Dynamic CMOS Design                                                                          275


         6.3.2        Speed and Power Dissipation of Dynamic Logic

         The main advantages of dynamic logic are increased speed and reduced implementation
         area. Fewer devices to implement a given logic function implies that the overall load
         capacitance is much smaller. The analysis of the switching behavior of the gate has some
         interesting peculiarities to it. After the precharge phase, the output is high. For a low input
         signal, no additional switching occurs. As a result, tpLH = 0! The high-to-low transition, on
         the other hand, requires the discharging of the output capacitance through the pull-down
         network. Therefore tpHL is proportional to CL and the current-sinking capabilities of the
         pull-down network. The presence of the evaluation transistor slows the gate somewhat, as
         it presents an extra series resistance. Omitting this transistor, while functionally not for-
         bidden, may result in static power dissipation and potentially a performance loss.
                The above analysis is somewhat unfair, because it ignores the influence of the pre-
         charge time on the switching speed of the gate. The precharge time is determined by the
         time it takes to charge CL through the PMOS precharge transistor. During this time, the
         logic in the gate cannot be utilized. However, very often, the overall digital system can be
         designed in such a way that the precharge time coincides with other system functions. For
         instance, the precharge of the arithmetic unit in a microprocessor can coincide with the
         instruction decode. The designer has to be aware of this “dead zone” in the use of dynamic
         logic, and should carefully consider the pros and cons of its usage, taking the overall sys-
         tem requirements into account.

         Example 6.15 A Four-Input Dynamic NAND Gate
                  Figure 6.53 shows the design of a four-input NAND example designed using the dynamic-cir-
                  cuit style. Due to the dynamic nature of the gate, the derivation of the voltage-transfer charac-
                  teristic diverges from the traditional approach. As we had discussed above, we will assume
                  that the switching threshold of the gate equals the threshold of the NMOS pull-down transis-
                  tor. This results in asymmetrical noise margins, as shown in Table 6.9.
                          The dynamic behavior of the gate is simulated with SPICE. It is assumed that all inputs
                  are set high as the clock transitions high. On the rising edge of the clock, the output node is
                  discharged. The resulting transient response is plotted in Figure 6.53, and the propagation
                  delays are summarized in Table 6.9. The duration of the precharge cycle can be adjusted by
                  changing the size of the PMOS precharge transistor. Making the PMOS too large should be
                  avoided, however, as it both slows down the gate, and increases the capacitive load on the
                  clock line. For large designs, the latter factor might become a major design concern as the
                  clock load can become excessive and hard to drive.

                  Table 6.9     The dc and ac parameters of a four-input dynamic NAND.

        Transistors       VOH        VOL      VM       NMH        NML         tpHL       tpLH       tpre

              6          2.5 V       0V       VTN     2.5-VTN      VTN     110 psec     0 nsec    83psec


                          As mentioned earlier, the static parameters are time-dependent. To illustrate this, con-
                  sider the four input NAND gate with all inputs tied together, and making a partial low-to-high
                  transition. Figure 6.54 shows a transient simulation of the output voltage for three different
276                                              DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                        Chapter 6


                                              VDD

                                   CLK                                         2.5

                                                         Out
                                    In1                                                                        Out
                                                                               1.5




                                                                     Voltage
                                                                                           IN &
                                    In2                                                    CLK

                                                                               0.5
                                    In3


                                                                               -0.5
                                    In4                                               0                  0.5                  1
                                                                                                               Time, ns


                                   CLK                               Figure 6.53 Schematic and transient response of a four-input
                                                                     dynamic NAND gate.

                               input transitions—to 0.45V, 0.5V and 0.55V, respectively. Above, we have defined the
                               switching threshold of the dynamic gate as the device threshold. However, notice that the
                               amount by which the output voltage drops is a strong function of the input voltage and the
                               available evaluation time. The noise voltage needed to corrupt the signal has to be larger if the
                               evaluation time is short. In other words, the switching threshold is really a function of the
                               evaluation time.

                               When evaluating the power dissipation of a dynamic gate, it would appear that
                         dynamic logic presents a significant advantage. There are three reasons for this. First, the
                         physical capacitance is lower since dynamic logic uses fewer transistors to implement a
                         given function. Also, the load seen for each fanout is one transistor instead of two. Sec-
                         ond, dynamic logic gates by construction can at most have one transition per clock cycle.
                         Glitching (or dynamic hazards) does not occur in dynamic logic. Finally, dynamic gates
                         do not exhibit short circuit power since the pull-up path is not turned on when the gate is
                         evaluating.
                               While these arguments are generally true, they are offset by other considerations: (i)
                         the clock power of dynamic logic can be significant, particularly since the clock node has
              3.0


                                                               CLK
              2.0
 Voltage, V




                                                    Vout
                                   Vout             (VG=0.45)
                         Vout
              1.0        (VG=0.55) (VG=0.5)                                               Figure 6.54 Effect of an input glitch on the
                                                                                          output. The switching threshold depends on the
                             VG                                                           time for evaluation. A larger glitch is acceptable
              0.0
                                                                                          if the evaluation phase is smaller. In this
                                                                                          example, the input glitches high during
                                                                                          evaluation and stays high during the whole
              -1.0
                     0        20          40        60          80        100             period.
                                            Time, nsec
Section 6.3        Dynamic CMOS Design                                                                             277


            a guaranteed transition on every single clock cycle; (ii) the number of transistors is higher
            than the minimal set required for implementing the logic; (iii) short-circuit power may
            exist when leakage-combatting devices are added (as will be discussed further); (iv) and,
            most importantly, dynamic logic generally displays a higher switching activity due to the
            periodic precharge and discharge operations. Earlier, the transition probability for a static
            gate was shown to be p0 p1 = p0 (1-p0). For dynamic logic, the output transition probability
            does not depend on the state (history) of the inputs, but rather on the signal probabilities
            only. For an n-tree dynamic gate, the output makes a 0→1 transition during the precharge
            phase only if the output was discharged during the preceding evaluate phase. The 0→1
            transition probability for an n-type dynamic gate hence equals

                                                       α0 → 1 = p0                                             (6.35)

            where p0 is the probability that the output is zero. This number is always larger or equal to
            p0 p 1. For uniformly distributed inputs, the transition probability for an N-input gate is:

                                                                    N
                                                       α0 → 1 = ------0-                                       (6.36)
                                                                        N
                                                                    2
            where N0 is the number of zero entries in the truth table of the logic function.

            Example 6.16 Activity estimation in dynamic logic
                   To illustrate the increased activity for a dynamic gate, once again consider a 2 input NOR
                   gate. An n-tree dynamic implementation is shown in Figure 6.55 along with its static counter-
                   part. For equi-probable inputs, there is then a 75% probability that the output node of the
                   dynamic gate will discharge immediately after the precharge phase, implying that the activity
                   for such a gate equals 0.75 (i.e PNOR= 0.75 CLVdd2fclk). The corresponding activity is a lot
                   smaller, 3/16, for a static implementation. For a dynamic NAND gate, the transition probabil-
                   ity is 1/4 (since there is a 25% probability the output will be discharged) while it is 3/16 for a
                   static implementation. Though these example illustrate that the switching activity of dynamic
                   logic is generally higher, it should be noted that dynamic logic has lower physical capaci-
                   tance. Both factors must be accounted for when choosing a logic style.
                       VDD                         VDD



               A                             CLK



                                                                    CL
               B
                                         A         B
                                                                            Figure 6.55 Static NOR versus n-type
                                   CL
                                                                            dynamic NOR.
        A          B                         CLK
278                                 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                   Chapter 6



      Problem 6.7 Activity Computation
              For the 4-input dynamic NAND gate, compute the activity factor with the following assump-
              tion for the inputs. Assume that the inputs are independent and pA=1 = 0.2, pB=1 = 0.3, pC=1 =
              0.5, and pD=1 = 0.4.



      6.3.3      Issues in Dynamic Design

      Dynamic logic clearly can result in high performance solutions compared to static circuits.
      However, there are several important considerations that must be taken into account if one
      wants dynamic circuits to function properly. This include charge leakage, charge sharing,
      backgate (and in general capacitive) coupling, and clock feedthrough. Some of these
      issues are highlighted in this section.

      Charge Leakage
      The operation of a dynamic gate relies on the dynamic storage of the output value on a
      capacitor. If the pull-down network is off, the output should ideally remain at the pre-
      charged state of VDD during the evaluation phase. However, this charge gradually leaks
      away due to leakage currents, eventually resulting in a malfunctioning of the gate. Figure
      6.56a shows the sources of leakage for the basic dynamic inverter circuit.
                 VDD
                                                 CLK
                       (4)
       CLK       Mp
                                   (3)
                                          Out
                             (1)         CL
        A=0                                                                                         t
                 M1
                                                Vout   Precharge                     Evaluate
                       (2)


        CLK
                  Me

                                                                                                    t
       (a) Leakage sources                                      (b) Effect on waveforms

                       Figure 6.56 Leakage issues in dynamic circuits.

            Source 1 and 2 are the reverse-biased diode and sub-threshold leakage of the
      NMOS pull-down device M1, respectively. The charge stored on CL will slowly leak away
      due these leakage sources, assuming that the input is at zero during evaluation. Charge
      leakage causes a degradation in the high level (Figure 6.56b). Dynamic circuits therefore
      require a minimal clock rate, which is typically on the order of a few kHz. This makes the
      usage of dynamic techniques unattractive for low performance products such as watches,
      or processors that use conditional clocks (where there are no guarantees on minimum
      clock rates). Note that the PMOS precharge device also contributes some leakage current
Section 6.3                Dynamic CMOS Design                                                                                279


         due to the reverse bias diode (source 3) and the subthreshold conduction (source 4). To
         some extent, the leakage current of the PMOS counteracts the leakage of the pull-down
         path. As a result the output voltage is going to be set by the resistive divider composed of
         the pull-down and pull-up paths.

         Example 6.17 Leakage in dynamic circuits
                           Consider the simple inverter with all devices set at 0.5µm/0.25µm. Assume that the input is
                           low during the evaluation period. Ideally, the output should remain at the precharged state of
                           VDD. However, as seen from Figure 6.57 the output voltage drops. Once the output drops
                           below the switching threshold of the fan-out logic gate, the output is interpreted as a low volt-
                           age. Notice that the output settles to an intermediate voltage. This is due to the leakage current
                           provided by the PMOS pull-up.
                     3.0




                     2.0
              Voltage, V




                                         Out



                     1.0                                                         Figure 6.57 Impact of charge leakage. The
                                                                                 output settles to an intermediate voltage
                                                                CLK              determined by a resistive divider of the pull-
                                                                                 down and pull up devices.
                     0.00            10         20        30                40
                                               time, ms


                Leakage is caused by the high impedance state of the output node during the evalu-
         ate mode, when the pull down path is turned off. The leakage problem van be counteracted
         by reducing the output impedance on the output node during evaluation. This is often done
         by adding a bleeder transistor as shown in Figure 6.58a. The only function of the
         bleeder—a pseudo-NMOS-like pull-up device—is to compensate for the charge lost due
         to the pull-down leakage paths. To avoid the ratio problems associated with this style of
         circuit and the associated static power consumption, the bleeder resistance is made high,
         or, in other words, the device is kept small. This allows the (strong) pull-down devices to
                            VDD                           VDD


        CLK                 Mp     Mbl          CLK       Mp          Mbl


                                         Out                                             Out

              A             Ma                     A      Ma


              B             Mb                     B      Mb


                                                                                     Figure 6.58 Static bleeders
          CLK               Me                    CLK     Me
                                  (a)                           (b)                  compensates for the charge-leakage.
280                          DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                    Chapter 6


      lower the Out node substantially below the switching threshold of the inverter. Often, the
      bleeder is implemented in a feedback configuration to eliminate the static power dissipa-
      tion (Figure 6.58b).

      Charge Sharing
      Another important concern in dynamic logic is the impact of charge sharing. Consider the
      circuit of Figure 6.59. During the precharge phase, the output node is precharged to VDD.
      Assume that all inputs are set to 0 during precharge, and that the capacitance Ca is dis-
      charged. Assume further that input B remains at 0 during evaluation, while input A makes
      a 0 → 1 transition, turning transistor Ma on. The charge stored originally on capacitor CL
      is redistributed over CL and Ca. This causes a drop in the output voltage, which cannot be
      recovered due to the dynamic nature of the circuit.
                 VDD


       CLK       Mp
                            Out

                                  CL
       A         Ma
                      X
                             Ca
       B=0       Mb


                             Cb
           CLK   Me
                                        Figure 6.59 Charge sharing in dynamic networks.


             The influence on the output voltage is readily calculated. Under the above assump-
      tions, the following initial conditions are valid: Vout(t = 0) = VDD and VX(t = 0) = 0. Two
      possible scenarios must be considered:
         1. ∆Vout < VTn — In this case, the final value of VX equals VDD – VTn(VX). Charge con-
            servation yields

                             C L V DD = C L V out ( t ) + C a [ V DD – V Tn ( V X ) ]
                                                        or
                                                                                              (6.37)
                                                          C
                          ∆V out = V out ( t ) – V DD = – -----a- [ V DD – V Tn ( V X ) ]
                                                          CL
         2. ∆Vout > VTn — Vout and VX reach the same value:
                                                                 Ca 
                                        ∆V out = – V DD  ------------------
                                                                           -                  (6.38)
                                                         C a + C L

      Which of the above scenarios is valid is determined by the capacitance ratio. The bound-
      ary condition between the two cases can be determined by setting ∆Vout equal to VTn in Eq.
      (6.38), yielding
Section 6.3      Dynamic CMOS Design                                                                                                 281


                                                      C                 V Tn
                                                      -----a- = ------------------------                                        (6.39)
                                                      CL        V DD – V Tn
         Overall, it is desirable to keep the value of ∆Vout below |VTp|. The output of the dynamic
         gate might be connected to a static inverter, in which case the low level of Vout would
         cause static power consumption. One major concern is circuit malfunction if the output
         voltage is brought below the switching threshold of the gate it drives.

         Example 6.18 Charge-Sharing
                  Let us consider the impact of charge sharing on the dynamic logic gate shown in Figure 6.60,
                  which implements a 3-input EXOR function y = A ⊕ B ⊕ C. The first question to be resolved
                  is what conditions cause the worst-case voltage drop on node y. For simplicity, ignore the
                  load inverter, and assume that all inputs are low during the precharge operation and that all
                  isolated internal nodes (Va, Vb, Vc, and Vd) are initially at 0V.
                          Inspection of the truth table for this particular logic function shows that the output
                  stays high for 4 out of 8 cases. The worst-case change in output is obtained by exposing the
                  maximum amount of internal capacitance to the output node during the evaluation period.
                  This happens for A B C or A B C. The voltage change can then be obtained by equating the
                  initial charge with the final charge as done with equation Eq. (6.38), yielding a worst-case
                  change of 30/(30+50) * 2.5V = 0.94V. To ensure that the circuit functions correctly, the
                  switching threshold of the connecting inverter should be placed below 2.5- 0.94 = 1.56V.

               The most common and effective approach to deal with the charge redistribution is to
         also precharge critical internal nodes, as is shown in Figure 6.61. Since the internal nodes
         are charged to VDD during precharge, charge sharing does not occur. This solution obvi-
         ously comes at the cost of increased area and capacitance.

         Capacitive Coupling
         The high impedance of the output node makes the circuit very sensitive to crosstalk
         effects. A wire routed over a dynamic node may couple capacitively and destroy the state
         of the floating node. Another equally important form of capacitive coupling is the back-
         gate (or output-to-input) coupling.Consider the circuit shown in Figure 6.62 in which a
         dynamic two-input NAND gate drives a static NAND gate. A transition in the input In of
                                                                   VDD = 2.5V
                                    CLK                              Load Inverter
                                                             y

                                    A                        Cy = 50 fF
                                          A
                                a
              Ca = 15 fF                          b
                                    B                   B                     Cb = 15 fF
                           B              B
                                c                                     d
                   Cc = 15 fF
                                                                      Cd = 10 fF
                                    C         C                                            Figure 6.60 Example illustrating the
                                                                                           charge sharing effect in dynamic logic.
                                    CLK
282                                  DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                        Chapter 6


                    VDD


       CLK           Mp        Mbl          CLK

                         Out


          A          Ma


          B          Mb

                                                  Figure 6.61 Dealing with charge-sharing by precharging
         CLK        Me                            internal nodes. An NMOS precharge transistor may also be
                                                  used, but this requires an inverted clock.

      the static gate may cause the output of the gate (Out2) to go low. This output transition
      couples capacitively to the other input of the gate, the dynamic node Out1, through the
      gate-source and gate-drain capacitances of transistor M4. A simulation of this effect is
      shown in Figure 6.63, and demonstrates that the output of the dynamic gate can drop sig-
      nificantly. This further causes the output of the static NAND gate not to drop all the way
      down to 0V, and a small amount of static power is dissipated. If the voltage drop is large
      enough, the circuit can evaluate incorrectly, and the NAND output may not go low. When
      designing and laying out dynamic circuits, special care is needed to minimize capacitive
      coupling.
                          VDD
                                                    VDD   VDD

             CLK          Mp
                                                    M6    M5
                                     Out1

                                                                Out2
                                       CL1
                                                                       In
              A=0         M1                                    CL2
                                                    M4

              B=0         M2
                                                    M3

               CLK        Me                                                Figure 6.62 Example demonstrating
                                                                            the effect of backgate coupling.



      Clock-Feedthrough
      A special case of capacitive coupling is clock-feedthrough, an effect caused by the capaci-
      tive coupling between the clock input of the precharge device and the dynamic output
      node. The coupling capacitance consists of the gate-to-drain capacitance of the precharge
      device, and includes both the overlap and the channel capacitances. This capacitive cou-
      pling causes the output of the dynamic node to rise above VDD on the low-to-high transi-
      tion of the clock, assuming that the pull-down network is turned off. Subsequently, the fast
      rising and falling edges of the clock couple onto the signal node, as is quite apparent in the
      simulation of Figure 6.63.
             The danger of clock feedthrough is that it may cause the (normally reverse-biased)
      junction diodes of the precharge transistor to become forward-biased. This causes electron
Section 6.3                 Dynamic CMOS Design                                                                                        283


                                                           due to clock feedthrough
                           3.0


                                                              Out1
                           2.0
              Voltage, V




                           1.0         CLK      IN
                                                          Out2 (does not discharge
                                                              to gnd)
                           0.0



                           -1.0
                                  0                 2                 4               6        Figure 6.63 Clock feedthrough effect.
                                                          Time, ns
         injection into the substrate, which can be collected by a nearby high impedance node in
         the 1 state, eventually resulting in faulty operation. CMOS latchup might be another result
         of this injection. For all purposes, high-speed dynamic circuits should be carefully simu-
         lated to ensure that clock-feedthrough effects stay within bounds.
                All the above considerations demonstrate that the design of dynamic circuits is
         rather tricky and requires extreme care. It should therefore only be attempted when high
         performance is required.


         6.3.4                        Cascading Dynamic Gates

         Besides the signal integrity issues, there is one major catch that complicates the design of
         dynamic circuits: straightforward cascading of dynamic gates to create more complex
         structures does not work. The problem is best illustrated with the two cascaded n-type
         dynamic inverters, shown in Figure 6.64a. During the precharge phase (i.e., CLK =0), the
         outputs of both inverters are precharged to VDD. Assume that the primary input In makes a
         0 → 1 transition (Figure 6.64b). On the rising edge of the clock, output Out1 starts to dis-
         charge. The second output should remain in the precharged state of VDD as its expected

                                      VDD                            VDD              V
                                                                                          CLK


          CLK                          Mp               CLK          Mp
                                                                                          In
                                             Out1                          Out2

                                                                                          Out1
                                                                                                            VTn
                       In

                                                                                          Out2                                         ∆V

              CLK                      Me                CLK         Me                                                                t



                                                (a)                                                          (b)
                    Figure 6.64 Cascade of dynamic n−type blocks.
284                             DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                      Chapter 6


      value is 1 (Out1 transitions to 0 during evaluation). However, there is a finite propagation
      delay for the input to discharge Out1 to GND. Therefore, the second output also starts to
      discharge. As long as Out1 exceeds the switching threshold of the second gate, which
      approximately equals VTn, a conducting path exists between Out2 and GND, and precious
      charge is lost at Out2. The conducting path is only disabled once Out1 reaches VTn, and
      turns off the NMOS pull-down transistor. This leaves Out2 at an intermediate voltage
      level. The correct level will not be recovered, as dynamic gates rely on capacitive storage
      in contrast to static gates, which have dc restoration. The charge loss leads to reduced
      noise margins and potential malfunctioning.
             The cascading problem arises because the outputs of each gate—and hence the
      inputs to the next stages—are precharged to 1. This may cause inadvertent discharge in the
      beginning of the evaluation cycle. Setting all the inputs to 0 during precharge addresses
      that concern. When doing so, all transistors in the pull-down network are turned off after
      precharge, and no inadvertent discharging of the storage capacitors can occur during eval-
      uation. In other words, correct operation is guaranteed as long as the inputs can only
      make a single 0 → 1 transition during the evaluation period2. Transistors are only be
      turned on when needed, and at most once per cycle. A number of design styles complying
      with this rule have been conceived. The two most important ones are discussed below.

      Domino Logic
      Concept. A Domino logic module [Krambeck82] consists of an n-type dynamic logic
      block followed by a static inverter (Figure 6.65). During precharge, the output of the n-
      type dynamic gate is charged up to VDD, and the output of the inverter is set to 0. During
      evaluation, the dynamic gate conditionally discharges, and the output of the inverter
      makes a conditional transition from 0 → 1. If one assumes that all the inputs of a Domino
      gate are outputs of other Domino gates3, then it is ensured that all inputs are set to 0 at the
      end of the precharge phase, and that the only transitions during evaluation are 0 → 1 tran-
      sitions. The formulated rule is hence obeyed. The introduction of the static inverter has the
      additional advantage that the fan-out of the gate is driven by a static inverter with a low-
      impedance output, which increases noise immunity. The buffer furthermore reduces the
      capacitance of the dynamic output node by separating internal and load capacitances.
            Consider now the operation of a chain of Domino gates. During precharge, all inputs
      are set to 0. During evaluation, the output of the first Domino block either stays at 0 or
      makes a 0 → 1 transition, affecting the second gate. This effect might ripple through the
      whole chain, one after the other, similar to a line of falling dominoes—hence the name.
      Domino CMOS has the following properties:
         • Since each dynamic gate has a static inverter, only non-inverting logic can be imple-
           mented. Although there are ways to deal with this, as is discussed in a subsequent
           section, this is major limiting factor, and pure Domino design has become rare.
             2
                 This ignores the impact of charge distribution and leakage effects, discussed earlier.
             3
               It is required that all other inputs that do not fall under this classification (for instance, primary inputs)
      stay constant during evaluation.
Section 6.3        Dynamic CMOS Design                                                                           285


                        VDD                                        VDD



                CLK     Mp                           CLK           Mp


                                                                                       Out2
                                                 Out1
          In1
          In2          PDN                     In4             PDN
          In3



                 CLK     Me                           CLK          Me
                                                                                Figure 6.65 DOMINO CMOS logic.


                • Very high speeds can be achieved: only a rising edge delay exists, while tpHL equals
                  zero. The inverter can be sized to match the fan-out, which is already much smaller
                  than in the complimentary static CMOS case, as only a single gate capacitance has
                  to be accounted for per fan-out gate.
                Since the inputs to a Domino gate are low during precharge, it is tempting to elimi-
         nate the evaluation transistor as this would reduce clock load and increase pull-down
         drive. However, eliminating the evaluation device extends the precharge cycle: the pre-
         charge now has to ripple through the logic network as well. Consider the logic network
         shown in Figure 6.66, where the evaluation devices have been eliminated. If the primary
         input In1 is 1 during evaluation, the output of each dynamic gate is 0 and the output of
         each static inverter is 1. On the falling edge of the clock, the precharge operation is started.
         Assume further that In1 makes a high-to-low transition. The input to the second gate is ini-
         tially high, and it takes two gate delays before In2 is driven low. During that time, the sec-
         ond gate cannot precharge its output, as the pull-down network is fighting the precharge
         device. Similarly, the third gate has to wait till the second gate precharges before it can
         start precharging, etc. Therefore the time taken to precharge the logic circuit is equal to its
         critical path. Another important negative is the extra power dissipation when both pull-up
         and pull-down devices are on. It is therefore good practice to always utilize evaluation
         devices.
         Dealing with the Non-inverting Property of Domino Logic. A major limitation in
         Domino logic is that only non-inverting logic can be implemented. This requirement has
                       VDD                            VDD                                            VDD


         CLK           Mp            CLK              Mp                              CLK            Mp
                         Out1                              Out2                                        Outn
                            0->1                            0->1                                          0->1

                In1                     In2
                                                                         In3                  Inn
                1->0
                                        1->0                             1->0                 1->0




                 Figure 6.66 Effect of ripple precharge when the evaluation transistor is removed. The
                 circuit also exhibits static power dissipation.
286                             DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                               Chapter 6


      limited the widespread use of pure Domino logic. There are several ways to deal with the
      non-inverting logic requirement. Figure 6.67 shows one approach to the problem—reorga-
      nizing the logic using simple boolean transforms such as De Morgan’s Law. Unfortu-
      nately, this sort of optimization is not always possible, and more general schemes may
      have to be used.
                                                                     Domino AND
      A
      B                                              X     A
                                                           B                                                    X
      C
                                                           C
      D
                                                           D
      E                                              Y     E                                                   Y
      F
      G                                                    F
      H                                                    G
                                                           H
                                                                                             Domino AND-OR
                                                                    Domino OR
                   (a) before logic transformation                       (b) after logic transformation

      Figure 6.67 Restructuring logic to enable implementation using non-inverting Domino Logic.

            A general but expensive approach to solving the problem is the use of differential
      logic. Dual-rail Domino is similar in concept to the DCVSL structure discussed earlier,
      but uses a precharged load instead of a static cross-coupled PMOS load. Figure 6.68
      shows the circuit schematic of an AND/NAND differential logic gate. Note that all inputs
      come from other differential Domino gates, and are low during the precharge phase, while
      making a conditional 0→1 transition during evaluation. Using differential Domino, it is
      possible to implement any arbitrary function. This comes at the expense of an increased
      power dissipation, since a transition is guaranteed every single clock cycle regardless of
      the input values—either O or O must make a 0→1 transition. The function of transistors
      Mf1 and Mf2 is to keep the circuit static when the clock is high for extended periods of time
      (bleeder). Notice that this circuit is not ratioed, even in the presence of the PMOS pull-up
      devices! Due to its high-performance, this differential approach is very popular, and is
      used in several commercial microprocessors.
      Optimization of Domino Logic Gates. Several optimizations can be performed on
      Domino logic gates. The most obvious performance optimization involves the sizing of
                                              VDD          VDD

                      CLK         Mp    Mf1          Mf2       Mp           CLK
          O = AB                                                                    O = AB

                            A     M1
                                                 A         B
                            B     M2



                         CLK      Me                           Figure 6.68 Simple dual rail (differential)
                                                               Domino logic gate.
Section 6.3    Dynamic CMOS Design                                                                     287


         the transistors in the static inverter. With the inclusion of the evaluation devices in Dom-
         ino circuits, all gates precharge in parallel, and the precharge operation takes only two
         gate delays—charging the output of the dynamic gate to VDD, and driving the inverter out-
         put low. The critical path during evaluation goes through the pull-down path of the
         dynamic gate, and the PMOS pull-up transistor of the static inverter. Therefore, to speed
         up the circuit during evaluation, the beta ratio of the static inverter should be made high so
         that its switching threshold is close to VDD. This can be accomplished by using a small
         (minimum) sized NMOS and a large PMOS device. The minimum-sized NMOS only
         impacts the precharge time, which is limited in general due to the parallel precharging of
         all gates. The only disadvantage of using a large beta ratio is a reduction in noise margin.
         A designer should therefor simultaneously consider the reduced noise margin and perfor-
         mance during the device sizing.
                Numerous variations of Domino                        VDD
         logic have been proposed [Bernstein98].
                                                           CLK       Mp
         One optimization that reduces area is Mul-
         tiple Output Domino Logic. The basic                                             O1= A B(C+D)

         concept is illustrated is Figure 6.69. It             A
                                                                        CLK
         exploits the fact that certain outputs are                                       O2= B(C+D) = B O3
         subsets of other outputs to generate a                B      CLK
         number of logical functions in a single                                          O3= C+D
         gate. In this example, O3 = C+D is used in        C       D
         all three outputs, and hence it is imple-
         mented at the bottom of the pull-down               CLK     Me
         network. Since O2 equals B ·O3, it can
         reuse the logic for O3. Notice that the
         internal nodes have to be precharged to            Figure 6.69 Multiple output Domino
         VDD to produce the correct results. Given
         that the internal nodes precharge to VDD, the number of devices driving precharge devices
         is not reduced. However, the number of evaluation transistors is drastically reduced as
         they are amortized over multiple outputs. Additionally, this approach results in a reduction
         of the fan-out factor, once again due to the reuse of transistors over multiple functions.
                Compound Domino (Figure 6.70) represents another optimization of the generic
         Domino gate, once again minimizing the number of transistors. Instead of each dynamic
         gate driving a static inverter, it is possible to combine the outputs of multiple dynamic
         gates with the aid of a complex static CMOS gate, as shown in Figure 6.70. The outputs of
         three dynamic structures, implementing O1 = A B C, O2 = D E F and O3 = G H, are com-
         bined using a single complex CMOS static gate that implements O = (o1+o2) o3. The total
         logic function realized this way equals O = A B C D E F + GH.
                Compound Domino is a useful tool for constructing complex dynamic logic gates.
         Large dynamic stacks are replaced using parallel small fan-in structures and complex
         CMOS gates. For example, a large fan-in Domino AND can be implemented as parallel
         dynamic NAND structures with lower fan-in that are combined using a static NOR gate.
         One important consideration in Compound Domino is the problem associated with back-
288                          DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                 Chapter 6




                    Mp CLK          Mp        CLK            Mp
         CLK
                                         O2
                     O1

                                                               O3                       O
               A             D


               B             E                      G
                                                                    Figure 6.70 Compound Domino logic uses
               C             F                      H               complex static gates at the output of the
                                                                    dynamic gates.

             CLK    Me    CLK       Me          CLK          Me




      gate coupling. Care must be taken to ensure that the dynamic nodes are not affected by the
      coupling between the output of the static gates and the output of dynamic nodes.

      np-CMOS
      The Domino logic presented in the previous section has the disadvantage that each
      dynamic gate requires an extra static inverter in the critical path to make the circuit func-
      tional. np-CMOS, provides an alternate approach to cascading dynamic logic by using two
      flavors (n-tree and p-tree) of dynamic logic. In a p-tree logic gate, PMOS devices are used
      to build a pull-up logic network, including a PMOS evaluation transistor (Figure 6.71)
      ([Goncalvez83, Friedman84, Lee86]). The NMOS predischarge transistor drives the out-
      put low during precharge. The output conditionally makes a 0 → 1 transition during eval-
      uation depending on its inputs.
                   VDD                                  VDD


         CLK        Mp                    CLK           Me
                             Out1


       In1                                              PUN
       In2         PDN                In4
       In3                                                          Out2
                                                                                Figure 6.71 The np-CMOS logic
                    Me                                                          circuit style.
             CLK                                         Mp
                                              CLK

                                 To other
                                 N-blocks                     To other
                                                              P-blocks
            np-CMOS logic exploits the duality between n-tree and p-tree logic gates to elimi-
      nate the cascading problem. If the n-tree gates are controlled by CLK, and p-tree gates are
      controlled using CLK, n-tree gates can directly drive p-tree gates, and vice-versa. Similar
      to Domino, n-tree outputs must go through an inverter when connecting to another n-tree
      gate. During the precharge phase (CLK = 0), the output of the n-tree gate, Out1, is charged
Section 6.4      Perspectives                                                                    289


         to VDD, while the output of the p-tree gate, Out2, is pre-discharged to 0V. Since the n-tree
         gate connects PMOS pull-up devices, the PUN of the p-tree is turned off at that time. Dur-
         ing evaluation, the output of the n-tree gate can only make a 1→0 transition, conditionally
         turning on some transistors in the p-tree. This ensures that no accidental discharge of Out2
         can occur. Similarly, n-tree blocks can follow p-tree gates without any problems, as the
         inputs to the n-gate are precharged to 0. A disadvantage of the np-CMOS logic style is that
         the p-tree blocks are slower than the n-tree modules, due to the lower current drive of the
         PMOS transistors in the logic network. Equalizing the propagation delays requires extra
         area.



6.4    Perspectives

         6.4.1      How to Choose a Logic Style?

         In the preceding sections, we have discussed several gate-implementation approaches
         using the CMOS technology. Each of the circuit styles has its advantages and disadvan-
         tages. Which one to select depends upon the primary requirement: ease of design, robust-
         ness, area, speed, or power dissipation. No single style optimizes all these measures at the
         same time. Even more, the approach of choice may vary from logic function to logic
         function.
                The static approach has the advantage of being robust in the presence of noise. This
         makes the design process rather trouble-free and amenable to a high degree of automation.
         This ease-of-design does not come for free: for complex gates with a large fan-in, comple-
         mentary CMOS becomes expensive in terms of area and performance. Alternative static
         logic styles have therefore been devised. Pseudo-NMOS is simple and fast at the expense
         of a reduced noise margin and static power dissipation. Pass-transistor logic is attractive
         for the implementation of a number of specific circuits, such as multiplexers and XOR-
         dominated logic such as adders.
                Dynamic logic, on the other hand, makes it possible to implement fast and small
         complex gates. This comes at a price. Parasitic effects such as charge sharing make the
         design process a precarious job. Charge leakage forces a periodic refresh, which puts a
         lower bound on the operating frequency of the circuit.
                The current trend is towards an increased use of complementary static CMOS. This
         tendency is inspired by the increased use of design-automation tools at the logic design
         level. These tools emphasize optimization at the logic rather than the circuit level and put
         a premium on robustness. Another argument is that static CMOS is more amenable to
         voltage scaling than some of the other approaches discussed in this chapter.


         6.4.2      Designing Logic for Reduced Supply Voltages

         In Chapter 3, we projected that the supply voltage for CMOS processes will continue to
         drop over the coming decade, and may go as low as 0.6V by 2010. To maintain perfor-
         mance under those conditions, it is essential that the device thresholds scale as well. Fig-
290                                DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                                            Chapter 6


       ure 6.72a shows a plot of the (VT, VDD) ratio required to maintain a given performance
       level (assuming that other device characteristics remain identical).
              This trade-off is not without penalty. Reducing the threshold voltage, increases the
       subthreshold leakage current exponentially as we derived in Eq. (3.40) (repeated here for
       the sake of clarity).
                1.5                                                                 10-2
                                                                                    10-3    VT = 0.1V
               1.25
                                                                                    10-4
                1.0           tpd=420pS     tpd=645pS                               10-5
                                                                                                           VT = 0.4 V
                                                                                    10-6
       VDD,V




                                                                             ID, A
               0.75                            tpd=840pS                            10 -7


                0.5
                                                                                    10-8
                                                                                    10-9
               0.25                                                                10-10
                                                                                   10-11
                0.0
                  0.05      0.15        0.25     0.35      0.45                    10-12
                                      VT, V                                              0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                                                                                         VGS, V
                      (a) VDD/VT for fixed performance                                     (b) Leakage as a function of VT
      Figure 6.72 Voltage Scaling (VDD/VT on delay and leakage)


                                                           V GS – V Th                        nV D S
                                                           ------------------------ 
                                                                                                   S 
                                                                                            – ------------
                                                                      S
                                       Ileakage = I S 10                          1 – 10                                    (6.40)
                                                                                                      

       with S the slope factor of the device. The subthreshold leakage of an inverter is the current
       of the NMOS for Vin = 0V and Vout = VDD (or the PMOS current for Vin = VDD and Vout =
       0). The exponential increase in inverter leakage for decreasing thresholds illustrated in
       Figure 6.72b.
              These leakage currents are particularly a concern for designs that feature intermit-
       tent computational activity separated by long periods of inactivity. For example, the pro-
       cessor in a cellular phone remains in idle mode for a majority of the time. While the
       processor is shutdown mode, the system should ideally consume zero or near-zero power.
       This is only possible if leakage is low—this is, the devices have a high threshold voltage.
       This is in contradictory to the scaling scenario that we just depicted, where high perfor-
       mance under low supply voltage means reduced thresholds. To satisfy the contradicting
       requirements of high-performance during active periods, and low leakage during standby,
       several process modifications or leakage-control techniques have been introduced in
       CMOS processes. Most processes with feature sizes at and below 0.18 µm CMOS support
       devices with different thresholds—typically a device with low threshold for high perfor-
       mance circuits, and a transistor with high threshold for leakage control. Another approach
       that is gaining ground is the dynamic control of the threshold voltage of a device by
       exploiting the body effect of the transistor. To use this approach for the control of individ-
       ual devices requires a dual-well process (see Figure 2.2).
              Clever circuit design can also help to reduce the leakage current, which is a function
       of the circuit topology and the value of the inputs applied to the gate. Since VT depends on
       body bias (VBS), the sub-threshold leakage of an MOS transistor depends not only on the
       gate drive (VGS), but also on the body bias. In an inverter with In = 0, the sub-threshold
Section 6.4     Perspectives                                                                                     291


         leakage of the inverter is set by the NMOS transistor with its VGS = VBS = 0 V. In more
         complex CMOS gates, the leakage current depends upon the input vector. For example,
         the sub-threshold leakage current of a two-input NAND gate is the least when A = B = 0.
         Under these conditions, the intermediate node X settles to,
                                                   V X ≈ V th ln ( 1 + n )                                     (6.41)
         The NAND gate sub-threshold leakage is then set by the top-most NMOS transistor with
         VGS = VBS = -VX. Clearly, the sub-threshold leakage under this condition is slightly smaller
         than that of the inverter. This reduction in sub-threshold leakage due to stacked transistors
         is called the stack effect. Figure 6.73 shows the leakage components for a simple two-
         input NAND gate.
                              VDD

                                                          A     B     VX             ISUB
                A                            B
                         P1         P2
                                                          0     0     Vth ln (1+n)   INSUB (VGS = VBS = -VX)
                                                          0     1     0              INSUB (VGS = VBS = 0)
                                         G                1     0     Vdd-VT         INSUB (VGS = VBS = 0)
                                                          1     1     0              2 IPSUB (VSG = VSB = 0)
                    A         N1
                               VX
                                                 Figure 6.73 Sub-threshold leakage reduction due to stack effect
                     B        N2                 in a two-input NAND gate.




               In short-channel MOS transistors, the sub-threshold leakage current depends not
         only on the gate drive (VGS) and the body bias (VBS), but also depends on the drain voltage
         (VDS). The threshold voltage of a short-channel MOS transistor decreases with increasing
         VDS due to drain induced barrier lowering (DIBL). Typical value for DIBL can range
         from 20-150 mV change in VT per volt change in VDS. Figure 6.74 illustrates the impact on
         the sub-threshold leakage as a result of
              • a decrease in gate drive—point A to B
              • an increase in body bias—point A to C
              • an increase in drain voltage—point A to D.
                Because of the latter, the impact of the stack effect is even more significant for
         short-channel transistors. The intermediate voltage reduces the drain-source voltage of the
         top-most device, and hence reduces its leakage. Consider again the two-input NAND gate
         of Figure 6.73, when both M1and M2 are off. From the simulated load lines shown in Fig-
         ure 6.75, we see that VX settles to approximately 100 mV in steady state. The steady state
         sub-threshold leakage in the NAND gate is hence due to VGS = VBS = -100 mV and VDS =
         VDD - 100 mV, which is 20 times smaller than that leakage of a stand-alone NMOS tran-
         sistor with VGS = VBS = 0 mV and VDS = VDD [Ye98].
                In summary, the sub-threshold leakage in complex stacked circuits can be signifi-
         cantly lower than in individual devices. Observe that the maximum leakage reduction
         occurs when all the transistors in the stack are off, and the intermediate node voltage
292                          DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                          Chapter 6




                                                                  Figure 6.74 Dependence of sub-
                                                                  threshold leakage current on terminal
                                                                  voltages for a typical 0.25 µm NMOS




                                                               Figure 6.75 Load line indicating the
                                                               steady state solution for the intermediate
                                                               node voltage in a transistor stack.



        reaches its steady state value. Exploiting this effect requires a careful selection of the input
        signals to every gate during standby or sleep mode.

        Problem 6.8 Computing VX
              Eq. (6.41) represents intermediate node voltage for a two-input NAND with less than 10%
              error, when A = B = 0. Derive Eq. (6.41) assuming (i) VT and Io of M1 and M2 are approxi-
              mately equal, (ii) NMOS transistors are identically sized, and (iii) n < 1.5. Explain the tem-
              perature dependence of stack effect and leakage reduction due to stack effect using equation
              (4.5).




6.5   Summary

        In this chapter, we have extensively analyzed the behavior and performance of combina-
        tional CMOS digital circuits with regard to area, speed, and power.
Section 6.6     To Probe Further                                                                    293


              • Static complementary CMOS combines dual pull-down and pull-up networks, only
                one of which is enabled at any time.
              • The performance of a CMOS gate is a strong function of the fan-in. Techniques to
                deal with fan-in include transistor sizing, input reordering, and partitioning. The
                speed is also a linear function of the fan-out. Extra buffering is needed for large fan-
                outs.
              • The ratioed logic style consists of an active pull-down (up) network connected to a
                load device. This results in a substantial reduction in gate complexity at the expense
                of static power consumption and an asymmetrical response. Careful transistor sizing
                is necessary to maintain sufficient noise margins. The most popular approaches in
                this class are the pseudo-NMOS techniques and differential DCVSL, which requires
                complementary signals.
              • Pass-transistor logic implements a logic gate as a simple switch network. This
                results in very simple implementations for some logic functions. Long cascades of
                switches are to be avoided due to a quadratic increase in delay with respect to the
                number of elements in the chain. NMOS-only pass-transistor logic produces even
                simpler structures, but might suffer from static power consumption and reduced
                noise margins. This problem can be addressed by adding a level-restoring transistor.
              • The operation of dynamic logic is based on the storage of charge on a capacitive
                node and the conditional discharging of that node as a function of the inputs. This
                calls for a two-phase scheme, consisting of a precharge followed by an evaluation
                step. Dynamic logic trades off noise margin for performance. It is sensitive to para-
                sitic effects such as leakage, charge redistribution, and clock feedthrough. Cascad-
                ing dynamic gates can cause problems, and should be addressed carefully.
              • The power consumption of a logic network is strongly related to the switching activ-
                ity of the network. This activity is a function of the input statistics, the network
                topology, and the logic style. Sources of power consumption such as glitches and
                short-circuit currents can be minimized by careful circuit design and transistor siz-
                ing.
              • Threshold voltage scaling is required for low-voltage operation. Leakage control is
                critical for low-voltage operation


6.6   To Probe Further

         The topic of (C)MOS logic styles is treated extensively in the literature. Numerous texts
         have been devoted to the issue. Some of the most comprehensive treatments can be found
         in [Weste93] and [Chandrakasan01]. Regarding the intricacies of high-performance
         design, [Shoji96] and [Bernstein98] offer the most in-depth discussion of the optimization
         and analysis of digital MOS circuits. The topic of power minimization is relatively new.
         Excellent reference works are [Chandrakasan95] and [Rabaey95].
294                        DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS                        Chapter 6


            Innovations in the MOS logic area are typically published in the proceedings of the
      ISSCC Conference and the VLSI circuits symposium, as well as the IEEE Journal of Solid
      State Circuits (especially the November issue).



                                             REFERENCES

      [Bernstein98] K. Bernstein et al., High-Speed CMOS Design Styles, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
         1998.
      [Chandrakasan95] A. Chandrakasan and R. Brodersen, Low Power Digital CMOS Design, Kluwer
         Academic Publishers, 1995.
      [Chandrakasan01] A. Chandrakasan, W. Bowhill, and F. Fox, ed., Design of High-Performance
         Microprocessor Circuits, IEEE Press, 2001.
      [Friedman84] V. Friedman and S. Liu, “Dynamic Logic CMOS Circuits,” IEEE Journal of Solid
         State Circuits, vol. SC-19, no. 2, pp. 263–266, April 1984.
      [Goncalvez83] N. Goncalvez and H. De Man, “NORA: A Racefree Dynamic CMOS Technique for
         Pipelined Logic Structures,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-18, no. 3, pp.
         261–266, June 1983.
      [Heller84] L. Heller et al., “Cascade Voltage Switch Logic: A Differential CMOS Logic Family,”
         Proc. IEEE ISSCC Conference, pp. 16–17, February 1984.
      [Krambeck82] R. Krambeck et al., “High-Speed Compact Circuits with CMOS,” IEEE Journal of
         Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-17, no. 3, pp. 614–619, June 1982.
      [Lee86] C. M. Lee and E. Szeto, “Zipper CMOS,” IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine, pp. 10–16,
         May 1986.
      [Parameswar96] A.Parameswar, H.Hara, and T.Sakurai, “A swing restored pass-transistor logic-
         based multiply and accumulate circuit for multimedia applications,” IEEE Journal of Solid State
         Circuits, vol.SC-31, no.6, pp.805-809, June 1996.
      [Rabaey95] J. Rabaey and M. Pedram, Ed., Low Power Design Methodologies, Kluwer, 1995.
      [Radhakrishnan85] D. Radhakrishnan, S. Whittaker, and G. Maki, “Formal Design Procedures for
         Pass-Transistor Switching Circuits,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-20, no. 2,
         pp. 531–536, April 1985.
      [Shoji88] M. Shoji, CMOS Digital Circuit Technology, Prentice Hall, 1988.
      [Shoji96] M. Shoji, High-Speed Digital Circuits, Addison-Wesley, 1996.
      [Sutherland99] I. Sutherland, B. Sproull, and D. Harris, Logical Effort, Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
      [Weste93] N. Weste and K. Eshragian, Principles of CMOS VLSI Design: A Systems Perspective,
         Addison-Wesley, 1993.
      [Yano90] K. Yano et al., “A 3.8 ns CMOS 16 × 16 b Multiplier Using Complimentary Pass-
         Transistor Logic,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-25, no 2, pp. 388–395, April
         1990.
      [Ye98] Y. Ye, S. Borkar, and V. De, “A new technique for standby leakage reduction in high-perfor-
         mance circuits,” Symposium on VLSI Circuits, pp 40-41, 1998.
Section 6.6   To Probe Further   295
1                                                                                 Chapter 6 Problem Set


                                   Chapter 6
                                  PROBLEMS
    1.   [E, None, 4.2] Implement the equation X = ((A + B) (C + D + E) + F) G using complemen-
         tary CMOS. Size the devices so that the output resistance is the same as that of an inverter
         with an NMOS W/L = 2 and PMOS W/L = 6. Which input pattern(s) would give the worst and
         best equivalent pull-up or pull-down resistance?
    2.   Implement the following expression in a full static CMOS logic fashion using no more than
         10 transistors:

                                Y = (A ⋅ B) + (A ⋅ C ⋅ E) + (D ⋅ E) + (D ⋅ C ⋅ B)

    3.   Consider the circuit of Figure 6.1.
                                                 VDD


                                                           B



                           D             C                 A

                                                                    Y

                                     B                 A



                                         C



                                             D




                        Figure 6.1 CMOS combinational logic gate.

         a. What is the logic function implemented by the CMOS transistor network? Size the NMOS
            and PMOS devices so that the output resistance is the same as that of an inverter with an
            NMOS W/L = 4 and PMOS W/L = 8.
         b. What are the input patterns that give the worst case tpHL and tpLH. State clearly what are the
            initial input patterns and which input(s) has to make a transition in order to achieve this
            maximum propagation delay. Consider the effect of the capacitances at the internal nodes.
         c. Verify part (b) with SPICE. Assume all transistors have minimum gate length (0.25µm).
         d. If P(A=1)=0.5, P(B=1)=0.2, P(C=1)=0.3 and P(D=1)=1, determine the power dissipation
            in the logic gate. Assume VDD=2.5V, Cout=30fF and fclk=250MHz.
    4.   [M, None, 4.2] CMOS Logic
         a. Do the following two circuits (Figure 6.2) implement the same logic function? If yes, what
            is that logic function? If no, give Boolean expressions for both circuits.
         b. Will these two circuits’ output resistances always be equal to each other?
         c. Will these two circuits’ rise and fall times always be equal to each other? Why or why not?
2                                                                                        Chapter 6 Problem Set


                               VDD
                                                                         VDD
                          E     6
                                                           A   6 B   6 C       6 D    6

            A    6 B      6     C        6 D   6
                                                                     E    6
                                                   F
                                                                                     F
                    A     4
                                                                 A   4

                    B     4                                          4
                                                                 B

                    C     4                                      C   4

                    D     4      E       1                       D   4     E     1

                                                                                     Figure 6.2 Two static
                              Circuit A                              Circuit B       CMOS gates.

    5.   [E, None, 4.2] The transistors in the circuits of the preceding problem have been sized to give
         an output resistance of 13 kΩ for the worst-case input pattern. This output resistance can vary,
         however, if other patterns are applied.
         a. What input patterns (A–E) give the lowest output resistance when the output is low? What
             is the value of that resistance?
         b. What input patterns (A–E) give the lowest output resistance when the output is high? What
             is the value of that resistance?
    6.   [E, None, 4.2] What is the logic function of circuits A and B in Figure 6.3? Which one is a
         dual network and which one is not? Is the nondual network still a valid static logic gate?
         Explain. List any advantages of one configuration over the other.
                    VDD                              VDD

            A       B                          A    B


            B       A                          B       A
                                     F                          F
            B        B                         B       B

            A       A                          A     A


                  Circuit A                        Circuit B         Figure 6.3 Two logic functions.


    7.   [E, None, 4.2] Compute the following for the pseudo-NMOS inverter shown in Figure 6.4:
         a. VOL and VOH
         b. NML and NMH
         c. The power dissipation: (1) for Vin low, and (2) for Vin high
         d. For an output load of 1 pF, calculate tpLH, tpHL, and tp. Are the rising and falling delays
             equal? Why or why not?
    8.   [M, SPICE, 4.2] Consider the circuit of Figure 6.5.
Digital Integrated Circuits - 2nd Ed                                                                             3


                              2.5 V
                                            PMOS

                              M2 W/L = 0.5µm/0.25µm


                                         Vout

                              M1 W/L = 4µm/0.25µm
                    Vin

                                            NMOS         Figure 6.4 Pseudo-NMOS inverter.

                 a. What is the output voltage if only one input is high? If all four inputs are high?
                 b. What is the average static power consumption if, at any time, each input turns on with an
                    (independent) probability of 0.5? 0.1?
                 c. Compare your analytically obtained results to a SPICE simulation.

                                            VDD


                                                (W/L) = 0.6


                                                                F
                    A          B        C            D
                                                              (W/L) = 1.5

                                                                            Figure 6.5 Pseudo-NMOS gate.


            9.   [M, None, 4.2] Implement F = ABC + ACD (and F) in DCVSL. Assume A, B, C, D, and their
                 complements are available as inputs. Use the minimum number of transistors.
           10.   [E, Layout, 4.2] A complex logic gate is shown in Figure 6.6.
                 a. Write the Boolean equations for outputs F and G. What function does this circuit
                     implement?
                 b. What logic family does this circuit belong to?
                 c. Assuming W/L = 0.5u/0.25u for all nmos transistors and W/L = 2u/0.25u for the pmos tran-
                     sistors, produce a layout of the gate using Magic. Your layout should conform to the fol-
                     lowing datapath style: (1) Inputs should enter the layout from the left in polysilicon; (2)
                     The outputs should exit the layout at the right in polysilicon (since the outputs would prob-
                     ably be driving transistor gate inputs of the next cell to the right); (3) Power and ground
                     lines should run vertically in metal 1.
                 d. Extract and netlist the layout. Load both outputs (F,G) with a 30fF capacitance and simu-
                     late the circuit. Does the gate function properly? If not, explain why and resize the transis-
                     tors so that it does. Change the sizes (and areas and perimeters) in the HSPICE netlist.
4                                                                                              Chapter 6 Problem Set



                                            VDD


                          F                                   G



              A                   A                   A            A


                      B                                       B

                                                                       Figure 6.6 Two-input complex logic gate.

    11.   Design and simulate a circuit that generates an optimal differential signal as shown in Figure
          6.7. Make sure the rise and fall times are equal.
                                                                   A Y Y
                                                          Y
                                      A                            0 0 1
                                                          Y
                                                                   1 1 0

                                                  Y
                                                                   50% of VDD
                                                  Y

                                          Figure 6.7 Differential Buffer.

    12.   What is the function of the circuit in Figure 6.8?


                              A                                             B

                  Y                                                               Y




                                                                            Figure 6.8 Gate.


    13.   Implement the function S = ABC + ABC + ABC + ABC, which gives the sum of two inputs
          with a carry bit, using NMOS pass transistor logic. Design a DCVSL gate which implements
          the same function. Assume A, B, C, and their complements are available as inputs.
    14.   Describe the logic function computed by the circuit in Figure 6.9. Note that all transistors
          (except for the middle inverters) are NMOS. Size and simulate the circuit so that it achieves a
Digital Integrated Circuits - 2nd Ed                                                                            5


                 100 ps delay (50-50) using 0.25µm devices, while driving a 100 fF load on both differential
                 outputs. (VDD = 2.5V) Assume A, B and their complements are available as inputs.
                                                    Y         Y

                        A              A                                   A             A


                        B              B                                   B             B


                        A              A                                   A             A


                        B              B                                   B             B



                                       Figure 6.9 Cascoded Logic Styles.

                         For the drain and source perimeters and areas you can use the following approxima-
                 tions: AS=AD=W*0.625u and PS=PD=W+1.25u.
           15.   [M, None. 4.2] Figure 6.10 contains a pass-gate logic network.
                 a. Determine the truth table for the circuit. What logic function does it implement?
                 b. Assuming 0 and 2.5 V inputs, size the PMOS transistor to achieve a VOL = 0.3 V.
                 c. If the PMOS were removed, would the circuit still function correctly? Does the PMOS
                     transistor serve any useful purpose?

                    A



                                  1.5/.25               Out



                    B                                             Figure 6.10 Pass-gate network.

           16.   [M, None, 4.2] This problem considers the effects of process scaling on pass-gate logic.
                 a. If a process has a tbuf of 0.4 ns, Req of 8 kΩ, and C of 12 fF, what is the optimal number of
                    stages between buffers in a pass-gate chain?
                 b. Suppose that, if the dimension of this process are shrunk by a factor S, Req scales as 1/S2, C
                    scales as 1/S, and tbuf scales as 1/S2. What is the expression for the optimal number of buff-
                    ers as a function of S? What is this value if S = 2?
           17.   [C, None, 4.2] Consider the circuit of Figure 6.11. Let Cx = 50 fF, Mr has W/L = 0.375/0.375,
                 Mn has W/Leff = 0.375/0.25. Assume the output inverter doesn’t switch until its input equals
                 VDD/2.
                 a. How long will it take Mn to pull down node x from 2.5 V to 1.25 V if In is at 0 V and B is
                    at 2.5V?
                 b. How long will it take Mn to pull up node x from 0 V to 1.25 V if VIn is 2.5 V and VB is
                    2.5 V?
                 c. What is the minimum value of VB necessary to pull down Vx to 1.25 V when VIn = 0 V?
6                                                                                  Chapter 6 Problem Set


                                     VDD

                                                   VDD
                                     Mr
                              B
                                                   M2
                In                         x                    Out
                              Mn

                                                    M1

                                                                             Figure 6.11 Level restorer.

    18.   Pass Transistor Logic
                 pass transistor network           VDD
                                                                             VDD = 2.5V
                              B                                              (W/L)2 = 1.5um/0.25um
                                                   M2                        (W/L)1 = 0.5um/0.25um
                                          x                                  (W/L)ni = 0.5um/0.25um
                              Mn1                         Out
                     A

                                                   M1
                                                                      kn’ = 115uA/V2, kp’ = -30uA/V2
                             B
                                                                      VtN = 0.43V, VtP = -0.4V
                              Mn2

                                                                    Figure 6.12 Level restoring circuit.

              Consider the circuit of Figure 6.12. Assume the inverter switches ideally at VDD/2, neglect
          body effect, channel length modulation and all parasitic capacitance throughout this problem.
          a. What is the logic function performed by this circuit?
          b. Explain why this circuit has non-zero static dissipation.
          c. Using only just 1 transistor, design a fix so that there will not be any static power dissipa-
              tion. Explain how you chose the size of the transistor.
          d. Implement the same circuit using transmission gates.
          e. Replace the pass-transistor network in Figure 6.12 with a pass transistor network that
              computes the following function: x = ABC at the node x. Assume you have the true and
              complementary versions of the three inputs A,B and C.
    19.   [M, None, 4.3] Sketch the waveforms at x, y, and z for the given inputs (Figure 6.13). You
          may approximate the time scale, but be sure to compute the voltage levels. Assume that
          VT = 0.5 V when body effect is a factor.
    20.   [E, None, 4.3] Consider the circuit of Figure 6.14.
          a. Give the logic function of x and y in terms of A, B, and C. Sketch the waveforms at x and y
              for the given inputs. Do x and y evaluate to the values you expected from their logic func-
              tions? Explain.
          b. Redesign the gates using np-CMOS to eliminate any race conditions. Sketch the wave-
              forms at x and y for your new circuit.
    21.   [M, None, 4.3] Suppose we wish to implement the two logic functions given by
          F = A + B + C and G = A + B + C + D. Assume both true and complementary signals are
          available.
Digital Integrated Circuits - 2nd Ed                                                                                           7



                            2.5 V                                                              VDD
                        φ
                              0V                                                   φ           Mp
                            2.5 V                                                                            x
                        A
                              0V                                                                                 CL = 100 fF
                                                                                   A           Ma
                            2.5 V                                                                        y
                        B                                                                      Mb            Ca = 10 fF
                                                                                   B
                             0V                                                                          z
                                                                                                             Cb = 10 fF
                                                                                       φ       Mn
                      Figure 6.13 Dynamic CMOS.

                                                                                  VDD
                       2.5 V
                        φ                                              φ                   φ
                         0V                                                                                               y
                       2.5 V                                                        x
                                                                        A                                    C
                        A
                       2.5 V
                        B                                               B                            φ

                        C                                              φ
                         0V
                      Figure 6.14 Cascaded dynamic gates.


                   a. Implement these functions in dynamic CMOS as cascaded φ stages so as to minimize the
                      total transistor count.
                   b. Design an np-CMOS implementation of the same logic functions. Does this design display
                      any of the difficulties of part (a)?
          22. Consider a conventional 4-stage Domino logic circuit as shown in Figure 6.15 in which all
                   precharge and evaluate devices are clocked using a common clock φ. For this entire problem,
                   assume that the pulldown network is simply a single NMOS device, so that each Domino
                   stage consists of a dynamic inverter followed by a static inverter. Assume that the precharge
                   time, evaluate time, and propagation delay of the static inverter are all T/2. Assume that the
                   transitions are ideal (zero rise/fall times).


                φ                       φ                     φ                        φ



              IN        Pulldown              Pulldown              Pulldown                   Pulldown
                        Network     Out1      Network     Out2      Network     Out3           Network            Out4

                φ                       φ                     φ                        φ



             Figure 6.15 Conventional DOMINO Dynamic Logic.
8                                                                                     Chapter 6 Problem Set


          a. Complete the timing diagram for signals Out1, Out2, Out3 and Out4, when the IN signal
             goes high before the rising edge of the clock φ. Assume that the clock period is 10 T time
             units.
          b. Suppose that there are no evaluate switches at the 3 latter stages. Assume that the clock φ
             is initially in the precharge state (φ=0 with all nodes settled to the correct precharge
             states), and the block enters the evaluate period (φ=1). Is there a problem during the evalu-
             ate period, or is there a benefit? Explain.
          c. Assume that the clock φ is initially in the evaluate state (φ=1), and the block enters the pre-
             charge state (φ = 0). Is there a problem, or is there any benefit, if the last three evaluate
             switches are removed? Explain.
    23.   [C, Spice, 4.3] Figure 6.16 shows a dynamic CMOS circuit in Domino logic. In determining
          source and drain areas and perimeters, you may use the following approximations: AD = AS =
          W × 0.625µm and PD = PS = W + 1.25µm. Assume 0.1 ns rise/fall times for all inputs,
          including the clock. Furthermore, you may assume that all the inputs and their complements
          are available, and that all inputs change during the precharge phase of the clock cycle.
          a. What Boolean functions are implemented at outputs F and G? If A and B are interpreted as
             two-bit binary words, A = A1A0 and B = B1B0, then what interpretation can be applied to
             output G?
          b. Which gate (1 or 2) has the highest potential for harmful charge sharing and why? What
             sequence of inputs (spanning two clock cycles) results in the worst-case charge-sharing
             scenario? Using SPICE, determine the extent to which charge sharing affects the circuit
             for this worst case..

                    2.5 V                  2.5 V                        2.5 V            2.5 V

           φ        2/0.25                  1/0.25            φ         2/0.25           1/0.25
                                                                                                    G
                                                     F

                   1/0.25      A0           0.5/0.25                    1/0.25           0.5/0.25       CL

          B0       1/0.25      B0                        A1           2/0.25     A1

               φ    2/0.25                               B1           2/0.25     B1

                                                                  φ    2/0.25


                   GATE 1                                             GATE 2
    Figure 6.16 DOMINO logic circuit.



    24.   [M, Spice, 4.3] In this problem you will consider methods for eliminating charge sharing in
          the circuit of Figure 6.16. You will then determine the performance of the resulting circuit.
          a. In problem 24 you determined which gate (1 or 2) suffers the most from charge sharing.
             Add a single 2/0.25 PMOS precharge transistor (with its gate driven by the clock φ and its
             source connected to VDD) to one of the nodes in that gate to maximally reduce the charge-
             sharing effect. What effect (if any) will this addition have on the gate delay? Use SPICE to
             demonstrate that the additional transistor has eliminated charge sharing for the previously
             determined worst-case sequence of inputs.
          b. For the new circuit (including additional precharge transistor), find the sequence of inputs
             (spanning two clock cycles) that results in the worst-case delay through the circuit.
Digital Integrated Circuits - 2nd Ed                                                                             9


                    Remember that precharging is another factor that limits the maximum clocking frequency
                    of the circuit, so your input sequence should address the worst-case precharging delay.
                 c. Using SPICE on the new circuit and applying the sequence of inputs found in part (b), find
                    the maximum clock frequency for correct operation of the circuit. Remember that the pre-
                    charge cycle must be long enough to allow all precharged nodes to reach ~90% of their
                    final values before evaluation begins. Also, recall that the inputs (A, B and their comple-
                    ments) should not begin changing until the clock signal has reached 0 V (precharge
                    phase), and they should reach their final values before the circuit enters the evaluation
                    phase.
           25.   [C, None, 4.2–3] For this problem, refer to the layout of Figure 6.17.
                 a. Draw the schematic corresponding to the layout. Include transistor sizes.
                 b. What logic function does the circuit implement? To which logic family does the circuit
                    belong?
                 c. Does the circuit have any advantages over fully complementary CMOS?
                 d. Calculate the worst-case VOL and VOH.
                 e. Write the expresions for the area and perimeter of the drain and source for all of the FETs
                    in terms of λ . Assume that the capacitance of shared diffuusions divides evenly between
                    the sharing devices. Copy the layout into Magic, extract and simulate to find the worst-
                    case tpHL time. For what input transition(s) does this occur? Name all of the parasitic
                    capacitances that you would need to know to calculate this delay by hand (you do not need
                    to perform the calculation).




                                                                                             Figure 6.17 Layout
                                                                                             of complex gate.




           26.   [E, None, 4.4] Derive the truth table, state transition graph, and output transition probabilities
                 for a three-input XOR gate with independent, identically distributed, uniform white-noise
                 inputs.
           27.   [C, None, 4.4] Figure 6.18 shows a two-input multiplexer. For this problem, assume indepen-
                 dent, identically-distributed uniform white noise inputs.
10                                                                                       Chapter 6 Problem Set


           a. Does this schematic contain reconvergent fan-out? Explain your answer.
           b. Find the exact signal (P1) and transition (P0 → 1) formulas for nodes X, Y, and Z for: (1) a
              static, fully complementary CMOS implementation, and (2) a dynamic CMOS implemen-
              tation.

               A                              X
               S                          C

                                                                    Z
                                                                C
                                              Y
               B                          C
                                                                           Figure 6.18 Two-input multiplexer
     28.   [M, None, 4.4] Compute the switching power consumed by the multiplexer of Figure 6.18,
           assuming that all significant capacitances have been lumped into the three capacitors shown
           in the figure, where C = 0.3 pF. Assume that VDD = 2.5 V and independent, identically-distrib-
           uted uniform white noise inputs, with events occuring at a frequency of 100 MHz. Perform
           this calculation for the following:
           a. A static, fully-complementary CMOS implementation
           b. A dynamic CMOS implementation
     29.   Consider the circuit shown Figure 6.19.
           a. What is the logic function implemented by this circuit? Assume that all devices (M1-M6)
               are 0.5µm/0.25µm.
           b. Let the drain current for each device (NMOS and PMOS) be 1µA for NMOS at VGS= VT
               and PMOS at VSG= VT. What input vectors cause the worst case leakage power for each
               output value? Explain (state all the vectors, but do not evaluate the leakage). Ignore DIBL.
           c. Suppose the circuit is active for a fraction of time d and idle for (1-d). When the circuit is
               active, the inputs arrive at 100 MHz and are uniformly distributed (Pr(A =1) = 0.5,
               Pr(B=1) = 0.5, Pr(C=1) = 0.5) and independent. When the circuit is in the idle mode, the
               inputs are fixed to one you chose in part (b). What is the duty cycle d for which the active
               power is equal to the leakage power?
                                 VDD = 2.5V        VDD = 2.5V

                         B           M4               M6
                                              A

                        C           M5                      Out


                                   A          M3                        CL = 50fF



                             B      M1        C       M2

                                                                Figure 6.19 CMOS
                                                                logic gate.
Digital Integrated Circuits - 2nd Ed                                                             11




                                             DESIGN PROJECT


                    Design, lay out, and simulate a CMOS four-input XOR gate in the stan-
                    dard 0.25 micron CMOS process. You can choose any logic circuit
                    style, and you are free to choose how many stages of logic to use: you
                    could use one large logic gate or a combination of smaller logic gates.
                    The supply voltage is set at 2.5 V! Your circuit must drive an external
                    20 fF load in addition to whatever internal parasitics are present in your
                    circuit.
                           The primary design objective is to minimize the propagation delay
                    of the worst-case transition for your circuit. The secondary objective is
                    to minimize the area of the layout. At the very worst, your design must
                    have a propagation delay of no more than 0.5 ns and occupy an area of
                    no more than 500 square microns, but the faster and smaller your circuit,
                    the better. Be aware that, when using dynamic logic, the precharge time
                    should be made part of the delay.
                           The design will be graded on the magnitude of A × tp2, the product
                    of the area of your design and the square of the delay for the worst-case
                    transition.
